Burmese Daw 
COLLECTED WORKS OF GEORGE ORWELL - COEDMPLETE AND UNABRIDG


rOMPUETE &UNABRIfX3Fn 


GEORGE 

ORWELL 

animal farm 
burmese days 
a clergyman’s daughter 
coming up for air 
keep the aspidistra flying 
nineteen eighty-four 


Seeker & Warborg/Octopus 




Animal Farm first published in Great Britain in 1945 
Burmese Days first published in Great Britain in 1935 
A Clergyman’s Daughter first published in Great Britain in 1935 
Coming up for Air first published in Great Britain in 1939 
Keep the Aspidistra Flying first published in Great Britain in 1936 
Nineteen Eighty-Four first published in Great Britain in 1 949 

© 1934, 1935s 1936, 1939s 1945s 1949 The Estate of Eric Blair 

This edition first published in 1976 by 
Martin Seeker & Warburg Limited, 

14 Carlisle Street, London W.i. 
in association with 
Octopus Books Limited, 

59 Grosvenor Street, London W.i. 

ISBN o 905712 04 8 

Printed in Great Britain by 
Jarrold & Sons Ltd., Norwich. 



CONTENTS 

animal farm 11 
burmese days 69 
a clergyman’s daughter 253 
coming up for air 427 
keep the aspidistra flying 573 
nineteen eighty-four 741 



INTRODUCTION 

T he novels of George Orwell, like his great essays, reflect, as in a mirror, 
constantly crystal-clear and frequently sharp with menace, the 
extensive changes of outlook and the shifts of values in British and' 
indeed much of human society in the first half of the twentieth century. 

Orwell was born Eric Blair in 1903 in an India that still seemed firmly fixed in 
an immutable Empire on which the sun never set. He attended Eton, his first 
publication was a patriotic poem printed by a provincial newspaper during the 
1914-18 war, and in 1922 he joined the Indian Imperial Police and served in 
Burma for the next five years. On leave to England in 1927 he decided not to 
return to the Far East and resigned. From that time his life, until then 
seemingly cast in an upper middle-class mould and pointing towards a 
conventional career in Imperial service, took an entirely fresh course. 
Determined to become a writer, he lived in a succession of mean rooms on next 
to nothing in London and Paris, and it was in the latter city that his first article 
as a professional writer was published. He worked there as a kitchen porter in a 
luxury hotel and tramped and picked hops in Kent, later both conjured up so 
vividly in Down and Out in Paris and London . During this time, 1930-33, 
Orwell picked up a meagre living as well as he could, whether by reviewing or 



teaching, and he continued to write Burmese Days, completing it before going 
down with a bout of recurrent pneumonia. When theahook came out in the 
U.S.A. (as no English publisher had bought it) Orwell had taken a job as a part- 
time assistant in a London bookshop. Burmese Days eventually appeared in 
England, a few months after A Clergyman's Daughter came out in 1935. Early 
in the following year Orwell was reviewing fiction for the New English Weekly 
and was also gathering material for a book on the depressed areas of the 
industrial North of England, The Road to Wigan Pier. 

When the Spanish Civil War began in 1936, Orwell foresaw the importance- 
of its outcome to the future of Europe and .before the year ended he had enlisted 
in Barcelona. While in the front line as a Republican militiaman -with the 
P.O.U.M., the anarchists and the Trotskyites, he was shot in the throat by a 
sniper. He survived and returned to England to write one of the most forthright 
and fearless books on the Spanish struggle, Homage to Catalonia, which came 
out in April 1938, one of the first books to denounce the Communists for 
exploiting the struggle for their own ends. He was repeatedly rejected on 
medical grounds when he tried to enlist in the British Army in 1939 on the 
outbreak of war: He subsequently served in the Home Guard, worked in the 


B.B.C. and became Literary Editor of Tribune. Coming Up for Air was written 
immediately before the war, prophesying the war, and Inside the Whale and 
The Lion and the Unicorn followed in wartime. Just after the war ended and as 
Orwell rounded off a stint as Observer war correspondent in Europe, Animal 
Farm> that outstanding political satire against tyranny in general and the 
Stalinist betrayal of the Revolution in particular, was published and he began 
work on Nineteen Eighty-Four. Thanks to the money earned by the book in 
America Orwell found himself, for the first time in his life, free from money 
worries, able to live on the island of Jura off the West of Scotland and to drop 
much of his journalistic work to concentrate on his book and a few last essays. 
But his health deteriorated progressively and seven months after the 
publication of Nineteen Eighty-Four he died in 1950 at the age of 46. 

George Orwell holds a unique place in contemporary English literature. He 
used facts and his own observation and when there was no actual reporting to 
be done, invention took over, as in Animal Farm and Nineteen Eighty-Four , and 
his clear vision, realistic deduction and profound understanding of human 
behaviour enabled him to reach the inner recesses of the reader’s mind and 
startle him to reflection and self-examination. He said that one of his motives 



for writing was a ‘desire to see things as they are, to find out true facts and store 
them up for the use of posterity ... In a peaceful age I might have written ornate 
or merely descriptive books . . . When I sit down to write a book, I do not say to 
myself “I am going to produce a work of art.” I write it because there is some lie 
I want to expose, some fact to which I want to draw attention, and my initial 
concern is to get a hearing.’ 

George Orwell certainly got his hearing and a constantly-increasing 
worldwide audience. Honesty, vigour and relevance to today are present in all 
these novels. Read any newspaper and Animal Farm is never far away and 
Nineteen Eighty -Four remains as true a description of the abuse of power as 
when he wrote it. 



animal 

farm 

A FAIRY STORY 




I 


Mr Jones, of the Manor Farm, had locked the hen-houses for the night, but 
was too drunk to remember to shut the pop-holes. With the ring of light from 
his lantern dancing from side to side, he lurched across the yard, kicking off his 
boots at the back door, drew himself a last glass of beer from the barrel in the 
scullery, and made his way up to bed, where Mrs Jones was already snoring. 

As soon as the light in the bedroom went out there was a stirring and a 
fluttering all through the farm buildings. Word had gone round during the day 
that old Major, the prize Middle White boar, had had a strange dream on the 
previous night and wished to communicate it to the other animals. It had been 
agreed that they should all meet in the big bam as soon as Mr Jones was safely 
out of the way. Old Major (so he was always called, though the name under 
which he had been exhibited was Willingdon Beauty) was so highly regarded 
on the farm that everyone was quite ready to lose an hour’s sleep in order to 
hear what he had to say. 

At one end of the big barn, on a sort of raised platform, Major was already 
ensconced on his bed of straw, under a lantern which hung from a beam. He 
was twelve years old and had lately grown rather stout, but he was still a 
majestic-looking pig, with a wise and benevolent appearance in spite of the fact 
that his tushes had never been cut. Before long the other animals began to 
arrive and make themselves comfortable after their different fashions. First 
came the three dogs. Bluebell, Jessie, and Pincher, and then the pigs who 
settled down in the straw immediately in front of the platform. The hens 
perched themselves on the window-sills, the pigeons fluttered up to the rafters, 
the sheep and cows lay down behind the pigs and began to chew the cud. The 
two cart-horses. Boxer and Clover, came in together, walking very slowly and 
setting down their vast hairy hoofs with great care lest there should be some 
small animal concealed in the straw. Clover was a stout motherly mare 
approaching middle life, who had never quite got her figure back after her 
fourth foal. Boxer was an enormous beast, nearly eighteen hands high, and as 
strong as any two ordinary horses put together. A white stripe down his nose 
gave him a somewhat stupid appearance, and in fact he was not of first-rate 
intelligence, but he was universally respected for his steadiness of character 
and tremendous powers of work. After the horses came Muriel, the white goat, 
and Benjamin, the donkey. Benjamin was the oldest animal on the farm, and 
the worst tempered. He seldom talked, and when he did it was usually to make 
some cynical remark— for instance, he would say that God had given him a tail 



Animal Farm 


*4 

to keep the flies off, but that he would sooner have had no tail and no flies. 
Alone among the animals on the farm he never laughed. If asked why, he 
would say that he saw nothing to laugh at. Nevertheless, without openly 
admitting it, he was devoted to Boxer; the two of them usually spent their 
Sundays together in the small paddock beyond the orchard, grazing side by 
side and never speaking. 

The two horses had just lain down when a brood of ducklings, which had 
lost their mother, filed into the barn, cheeping feebly and wandering from side 
to side to find some place where they would not be trodden on. Clover made a 
sort of wall round them with her great foreleg, and the ducklings nestled down 
inside it, and promptly fell asleep. At the last moment Mollie, the foolish, 
pretty white mare who drew Mr Jones’s trap, came mincing daintily in, 
chewing at a lump of sugar. She took a place near the front and began flirting 
her white mane, hoping to draw attention to the red ribbons it was plaited 
with. Last of all came the cat, who looked round, as usual, for the warmest 
place, and finally squeezed herself in between Boxer and Clover; there she 
purred contentedly throughout Major’s speech without listening to a word of 
what he was saying. 

All the animals were now present except Moses, the tame raven, who slept 
on a perch behind the back door. When Major saw that they had all made 
themselves comfortable and were waiting attentively, he cleared his throat and 
began: 

‘Comrades, you have heard already about the strange dream that I had last 
night. But I will come to the dream later. I have something else to say first. I do 
not think, comrades, that I shall be with you for many months longer, and 
before I die, I feel it my duty to pass on to you such wisdom as I have acquired. 
I have had a long life, I have had much time for thought as I lay alone in my 
stall, and I think I may say that I understand the nature of life on this earth as 
well as any animal now living. It is about this that I wish to speak to you. 

‘Now, comrades, what is the nature of this life of ours? Let us face it: our 
lives are miserable, laborious, and short. We are bom, we are given just so 
much food as will keep the breath in our bodies, and those of us who are 
capable of it are forced to work to the last atom of our strength; and the very 
instant that our usefulness has come to an end we are slaughtered with hideous 
cruelty. No animal in England knows the meaning of happiness or leisure after 
he is a year old. No animal in England is free. The life of an animal is misery 
and slavery: that is the plain truth. 

‘But is this simply part of the order of nature? Is it because this land of ours 
is so poor that it cannot afford a decent life to those who dwell upon it? No, 
comrades, a thousand times no! The soil of England is fertile, its climate is 
good, it is capable of affording food in abundance to an enormously greater 
number of animals than now inhabit it. This single farm of ours would support 
a dozen horses, twenty cows, hundreds of sheep-and all of them living in a 
comfort and a dignity that are now almost beyond our imagining. Why then do 
we continue in this miserable condition? Because nearly the whole of the 
produce of our labour is stolen from us by human beings. There, comrades, is 



Animal Farm j y 

the answer to all our problems. It is summed up in a single word-Man. Man is 
the only real enemy we have. Remove Man from the scene, and the root cause 
of hunger and overwork is abolished for ever. 

‘Man is the only creature that consumes without producing. He does not 
give milk, he does not lay eggs, he is too weak to pull the plough, he cannot run 
fast enough to catch rabbits. Yet he is lord of all the animals. He sets them to 
work, he gives back to them the bare minimum that will prevent them from 
starving, and the rest he keeps for himself. Our labour tills the soil, our dung 
fertilizes it, and yet there is not one of us that owns more than his bare skin. 
Y ou cows that I see before me, how many thousands of gallons of milk have 
you given during this last year? And what has happened to that milk which 
should have been breeding up sturdy calves? Every drop of it has gone down 
the throats of our enemies. And you hens, how many eggs have you laid this 
year, and how many of those eggs ever hatched into chickens? The rest have all 
gone to market to bring in money for Jones and his men. And you, Clover, 
where are those four foals you bore, who should have been the support and 
pleasure of your old age? Each was sold at a year old-you will never see one of 
them again. In return for your four confinements and all your labour in the 
field, what have you ever had except your bare rations and a stall? 

‘And even the miserable lives we lead are not allowed to reach their natural 
span. For myself I do not grumble, for I am one of the lucky ones. I am twelve 
years old and have had over four hundred children. Such is the natural life of a 
pig. But no animal escapes the cruel knife in the end. You young porkers who 
are sitting in front of me, every one of you will scream your lives out at the 
block within a year. To that horror we all must come-cows, pigs, hens, sheep, 
everyone. Even the horses and the dogs have no better fate. You, Boxer, the 
very day that those great muscles of yours lose their power, Jones will sell you 
to the knacker, who will cut your throat and boil you down for the fox-hounds. 
As for the dogs, when they grow old and toothless, Jones ties a brick round 
their necks and drowns them in the nearest pond. 

T$ it not crystal clear, then, comrades, that all the evils of this life of ours 
spring from the tyranny of human beings? Only get rid of Man, and the 
produce of our labour would be our own. Almost overnight we could become 
rich and free. What then must we do? Why, work night and day, body and soul, 
for the overthrow of the human race! That is my message to you, comrades: 
Rebellion! I do not know when that Rebellion will come, it might be in a week 
or in a hundred years, but I know, as surely as I see this straw beneath my feet, 
that sooner or later justice will be done. Fix your eyes on that, comrades, 
throughout the short remainder of your lives! And above all, pass on this 
message of mine to those who come after you, so that future generations shall 
carry on the struggle until it is victorious. 

‘And remember, comrades, your resolution must never falter. No argument 
must lead you astray. Never listen when they tell you that Man and the animals 
have a common interest, that the prosperity of the one is the prosperity of the 
others. Itis all lies. Man serves the interests of no creature except himself. And 
among us animals let there be perfect unity, perfect comradeship in the 



1 6 Animal Farm 

struggle. All men are enemies. All animals are comrades.’ 

At this moment there was a tremendous uproar. While Major was speaking 
four large rats had crept out of their holes and were sitting on their hind- 
quarters listening to him. The dogs had suddenly caught sight of them, and it 
was only by a swift dash for their holes that the rats saved their lives. Major 
raised his trotter for silence. 

‘Comrades,’ he said, ‘here is a point that must be settled. The wild creatures, 
such as rats and rabbits-are they our friends or our enemies? Let us put it to 
the vote. I propose this question to the meeting: Are rats comrades?’ 

The vote was taken at once, and it was agreed by an overwhelming majority 
that rats were comrades. There were only four dissentients, the three dogs and 
the cat, who was afterwards discovered to have voted on both sides. Major 
continued: 

T have little more to say. I merely repeat, remember always your duty of 
enmity towards Man and all his ways. Whatever goes upon two legs, is an 
enemy. Whatever goes upon four legs, or has wings, is a friend. And remember 
also that in fighting against Man, we must not come to resemble him. Even 
when you have conquered him, do not adopt his vices. No animal must ever 
live in a house, or sleep in a bed, or wear clothes, or drink alcohol, or smoke 
tobacco, or touch money, or engage in trade. All the habits of Man are evil. 
And, above all, no animal must ever tyrannize over 'his own kind. Weak or 
strong, clever or simple, we are all brothers. No animal must ever kill any other 
animal. All animals are equal. 

‘And now, comrades, I will tell you about my dream of last night. I cannot 
describe that dream to you. It was a dream of the earth as it will be when Man 
has vanished. But it reminded me of something that I had long forgotten. 
Many years ago, when I was a little pig, my mother and the other sows used to 
sing an old song of which they knew only the tune and the three first words. I 
had known that tune in my infancy, but it had long since passed out of my 
mind. Last night, however, it came back to me in my dream. And what is more, 
the words of the song also came back-words, I am certain, which were sung by 
the animals of long ago and have been lost to memory for generations. I will 
sing you that song now, comrades. I am old and my voice is hoarse, but when I 
have taught you the tune, you can sing it better for yourselves. It is called 
“Beasts of England”,’ 

Old Major cleared his throat and began to sing. As he had said, his voice was 
hoarse, but he sang well enough, and it was a stirring tune, something between 
‘Clementine’ and ‘La Cucuracha’. The words ran: 

Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland, 

Beasts of every land and clime, 

Hearken to my joyful tidings 
Of the golden future time. 

Soon or late the day is ccHning, 

Tyrant Man shall be o’erthrown, 

, And the fruitful fields of England 

Shall be trod by beasts alone. 



Animal Farm 


*7 

Rings shall vanish from our noses. 

And the harness from our back, 

Bit and spur shall rust forever. 

Cruel whips no more shall crack. 

Riches more than mind can picture, 

Wheat and barley, oats and hay, 

Clover, beans, and mangel-wurzels 
Shall be ours upon that day. 

Bright will shine the fields of England, 

Purer shall its water be. 

Sweeter yet shall blow its breezes 
On the day that sets us free. 

For that day we all must labour. 

Though we die before it break. 

Cows and horses, geese and turkeys, 

All must toil for freedom’s sake. 

Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland, 

Beasts of every land and clime. 

Hearken well and spread my tidings 
Of the golden future time 

The singing of this song threw the animals into the wildest excitement. 
Almost before Major had reached the end, they had begun singing it for 
themselves. Even the stupidest of them had already picked up the tune and a 
few of the words, and as for the clever ones, such as the pigs and dogs, they had 
the entire song by heart within a few minutes. And then, after a few 
preliminary tries, the whole farm burst out into ‘Beasts of England’ in 
tremendous unison. The cows lowed it, the dogs whined it, the sheep bleated 
it, the horses whinnied it, the ducks quacked it. They were so delighted with 
the song that they sang it right through five times in succession, and might 
have continued singing it all night if they had not been interrupted. 

Unfortunately, the uproar awoke Mr Jones, who sprang out of bed, feeling 
sure that there was a fox in the yard. He seized the gun which always stood in a 
corner of his bedroom, and let fly a charge of number 6 shot into the darkness. 
The pellets buried themselves in the wall of the barn and the meeting broke up 
hurriedly. Everyone fled to his own sleeping place. The birds jumped on to 
their perches, the animals settled down in the straw, and the whole farm was 
asleep in a moment. 


2 


Three nights later old Major died peacefully in his sleep. His body was buried 
at the foot of the orchard. 

This was early in March. During the next three months there was much 



1 8 Animal Farm 

secret activity. Major’s speech had given to the more intelligent animals on the 
farm a completely new outlook on life. They did not know when the Rebellion 
predicted by Major would take place, they had no reason for thinking that it 
would be within their own lifetime, but they saw clearly that it was their duty 
to prepare for it. The work of teaching and organizing the others fell naturally 
upon the pigs, who were generally recognized as being the cleverest of the 
animals. Pre-eminent among the pigs were two young boars named Snowball 
and Napoleon, whom Mr Jones was breeding up for sale. Napoleon was a 
large, rather fierce-looking Berkshire boar, the only Berkshire on the farm, not 
much of a talker, but with a reputation for getting his own way. Snowball was a 
more vivacious pig than Napoleon, quicker in speech and more inventive, but 
was not considered to have the same depth of character. All the other male pigs 
on the farm were porkers. The best known among them was a small fat pig 
named Squealer, with very round cheeks, twinkling eyes, nimble movements, 
and a shrill voice. He was a brilliant talker, and when he was arguing some 
difficult point he had a way of skipping from side to side and whisking his tail 
which was somehow very persuasive. The others said of Squealer that he could 
turn black into white. 

These three had elaborated old Major’s teachings into a complete system of 
thought, to which they gave the name of Animalism. Several nights a week, 
after Mr Jones was asleep, they held secret meetings in the barn and 
expounded the principles of Animalism to the others. At the beginning they 
met with such stupidity and apathy. Some of the animals talked of the duty of 
loyalty to Mr Jones, whom they referred to as ‘Master’, or made elementary 
remarks such as ‘Mr Jones feeds us. If he were gone, we should starve to 
death.’ Others asked such questions as ‘Why should we care what happens 
after we are dead?’ or ‘If this rebellion is to happen anyway, what difference 
does it make whether we workfor it or not?’, and the pigs had great difficulty in 
making them see that this was contrary to the spirit of Animalism. The 
stupidest questions of all were asked by Mollie, the white mare. The very first 
question she asked Snowball was: ‘Will there still be sugar after the Rebellion?’ 

‘No,’ said Snowball firmly. ‘We have no means of making sugar on this farm 
Besides, you do not need sugar. You will have all the oats and hay you want.’ 

‘And shall I still be allowed to wear ribbons in my mane?’ asked Mollie. 

‘Comrade,’ said Snowball, ‘those ribbons that you are so devoted to are the 
badge of slavery. Can you not understand that liberty is worth more than 
ribbons?’ 

Mollie agreed, but she did not sound very convinced. 

The pigs had an even harder struggle to counteract the lies put about by 
Moses, the tame raven. Moses, who was Mr Jones’s especial pet, was a spy and 
a tale-bearer, but he was also a clever talker. He claimed to know of the 
existence of a mysterious country called Sugarcandy Mountain, to which all 
animals went when they died. It was situated somewhere up in the sky, a little 
distance beyond the clouds, Moses said. In Sugarcandy Mountain it was 
Sunday seven days a week, clover was in season all the year round, and lump 
sugar and linseed cake grew on the hedges. The animals hated Moses because 



Animal Farm 


19 

he told tales and did not work., but some of them believed in Sugarcandy 
Mountain, and the pigs had to argue very hard to persuade them that there was 
no such place. 

Their most faithful disciples were the two carthouses, Boxer and Clover. 
These two had great difficulty in thinking anything out for themselves, but 
having once accepted the pigs as their teachers, they absorbed everything that 
they were told, and passed it on to the other animals by simple arguments. 
They were unfailing in their attendance at the secret meetings in the barn, and 
led the singing of ‘Beasts of England’, with which the meetings always ended. 

Now, as it turned out, the Rebellion was achieved much earlier and more 
easily than anyone had expected. In the past years Mr Jones, although a hard 
master, had been a capable farmer, but of late he had fallen on evil days. He 
had become much disheartened after losing money in a lawsuit, and had taken 
to drinking more than was good for him. For whole days at a time he would 
lounge in his Windsor chair in the kitchen, reading the newspapers, drinking, 
and occasionally feeding Moses on crusts of bread soaked in beer. His men 
were idle and dishonest, the fields were full of weeds, the buildings wanted 
roofing, the hedges were neglected, and the animals were underfed. 

June came and the hay was almost ready for cutting. On Midsummer’s Eve, 
which was a Saturday, Mr Jones went into Willingdon and got so drunk at the 
Red Lion that he did not come back till midday on Sunday. The men had 
milked the cows in the early morning and then had gone out rabbiting, without 
bothering to feed the animals. When Mr Jones got back he immediately went 
to sleep on the drawing-room sofa with the News of the World over his face, so 
that when evening came, the animals were still unfed. At last they could stand 
it no longer. One of the cows broke in the door of the store-shed with her horns 
and all the animals began to help themselves from the bins. It was just then 
that Mr Jones woke up. The next moment he and his four men were in the 
store-shed with whips in their hands, lashing out in all directions. This was 
more than the hungry animals could bear. With one accord, though nothing of 
the kind had been planned beforehand, they flung themselves upon their 
tormentors. Jones and his men suddenly found themselves being butted and 
kicked from all sides. The situation was quite out of their control. They had 
never seen animals behave like this before, and this sudden uprising of 
creatures whom they were used to thrashing and maltreating just as they chose, 
frightened them almost out of their wits. After only a moment or two they gave 
up trying to defend themselves and took to their heels. A minute later all five of 
them were in full flight down the cart-track that led to the main road, with the 
animals pursuing them in triumph. 

Mrs Jones looked out of the bedroom window, saw what was happening, 
hurriedly flung a few possessions into a carpet bag, and slipped out of the farm 
by another way. Moses sprang off his perch and flapped after her, croaking 
loudly. Meanwhile the animals had chased Jones and his men out on tothe 
road and slammed the five-barred gate behind them. And so, almost before 
they knew what was happening, the Rebellion had been successfully carried 
through: Jones was expelled, and the Manor Farm was theirs. 



20 


Animal Farm 


For the first few minutes the animals could hardly believe in their good 
fortune. Their first act was to gallop in a body right round the boundaries of 
the farm, as though to make quite sure that no human being was hiding 
anywhere upon it; then they raced back to the farm buildings to wipe out the 
last traces of Jones’s hated reign. The harness-room at the end of the stables 
was broken open; the bits, the nose-rings, the dog-chains, the cruel knives with 
which Mr Jones had been used to castrate the pigs and lambs, were all flung 
down the well. The reins, the halters, the blinkers, the degrading nosebags, 
were thrown on to the rubbish fire which was burning m the yard. So were the 
whips. All the animals capered with joy when they saw the whips going up in 
flames. Snowball also threw on to the fire the ribbons with which the horses’ 
manes and tails had usually been decorated on market days. 

‘Ribbons,’ he said, ‘should be considered as clothes, which are the mark of a 
human being. All animals should go naked.’ 

When Boxer heard this he fetched the small straw hat which he wore in 
summer to keep the flies out of his ears, and flung it on to the fire with the rest. 

In a very little while the animals had destroyed everything that reminded 
them of Mr Jones. Napoleon then led them back to the store-shed and served 
out a double ration of corn to everybody, with two biscuits for each dog. Then 
they sang ‘Beasts of England’ from end to end seven times running, and after 
that they settled down for the night and slept as they had never slept before. 

But they woke at dawn as usual, and suddenly remembering the glorious 
thing that had happened, they all Taced out into the pasture together. A little 
way down the pasture there was a knoll that commanded a view of most of the 
farm. The animals rushed to the top of it and gazed round them in the clear 
morning light. Yes, it was theirs-everything that they could see was theirs! In 
the ecstasy of that thought they gambolled round and round, they hurled 
themselves into the air in great leaps of excitement. They rolled in the dew, 
they cropped mouthfuls of the sweet summer grass, they kicked up clods of the 
black earth and snuffed its rich scent. Then they made a tour of inspection of 
the whole farm and surveyed with speechless admiration the ploughland, the 
hayfield, the orchard, the pool, the spinney. It was as though they had never 
seen these things before, and even now they could hardly believe that it was all 
their own. 

Then they filed back to the farm buildings and halted in silence outside the 
door of the farmhouse. That was theirs too, but they were frightened to go 
inside. After a moment, however. Snowball and Napoleon butted the door 
open with their shoulders and the animals entered in single file, walking with 
the utmost care for fear of disturbing anything. They tiptoed from room to 
room, afraid to speak above a whisper and gazing with a kind of awe at the 
unbelievable luxury, at the beds with their feather mattresses, the looking- 
glasses, the horsehair sofa, the Brussels carpet, the lithograph of Queen 
Victoria over the drawing-room mantelpiece. They were just coming down the 
stairs when Mollie was discovered to be missing. Going back, the others found 
that she had remained behind in the best bedroom. She had taken a piece of 
blue ribbon from Mrs Jones’s dressing-table, and was holding it against her 



Animal Farm 


21 


shoulder and admiring herself in the glass in a very foolish manner. The others 
reproached her sharply, and they went outside. Some hams hanging in the 
kitchen were taken out for burial, and the barrel of beer in the scullery was 
stove in with a kick from Boxer’s hoof, otherwise nothing in the house was 
touched. A unanimous resolution was passed on the spot that the farmhouse 
should be preserved as a museum. All were agreed that no animal must ever 
live there. 

The animals had their breakfast, and then Snowball and Napoleon called 
them together again. 

‘Comrades,’ said Snowball, ‘it is half past six and we have a long day before 
us. Today we begin the hay harvest. But there is another matter that must be 
attended to first.’ 

The pigs now revealed that during the past three months they had taught 
themselves to read and write from an old spelling book which had belonged to 
Mr Jones’s children and which had been thrown on the rubbish heap. 
Napoleon sent for pots of black and white paint and led the way down to the 
five-barred gate that gave on to the main road. Then Snowball (for it was 
Snowball who was best at writing) took a brush between the two knuckles of 
his trotter, painted out manor farm from the top bar of the gate and in its place 
painted animal farm. This was to be the name of the farm from now onwards. 
After this they went back to the farm buildings, where Snowball and Napoleon 
sent for a ladder which they caused to be set against the end wall of the big 
bam. They explained that by their studies of the past three months the pigs 
had succeeded in reducing the principles of Animalism to Seven Command- 
ments. These Seven Commandments would now be inscribed on the wall; 
they would form an unalterable law by which all the animals on Animal Farm 
must live for ever after. With some difficulty (for it is not easy for a pig to 
balance himself on a ladder) Snowball climbed up and set to work, with 
Squealer a few rungs below him holding the paint-pot. The Commandments 
were written on the tarred wall- in great white letters that could be read thirty 
yards away. They ran thus: 

THE SEVEN COMMANDMENTS 

1 . Whatever goes upon two legs is an enemy. 

2. Whatever goes upon four legs, or has wings, is a friend. 

3. No animal shall wear clothes. 

4. No animal shall sleep in a bed. 

5. No animal shall drink alcohol. 

6. No animal shall kill any other animal. 

7. All animals are equal. 

It was very neatly written, and except that ‘friend’ was written ‘fremd’ and 
one of the ‘S Y was the wrong way round, the spelling was correct all the way 
through. Snowball read it aloud for the benefit of the others. All the animal s 
nodded in complete agreement, and the cleverer ones at once began to leaSm the 
Commandments by hem. 



22 


Animal Farm 


‘Now, comrades,’ said Snowball, throwing down the paint-brush, ‘to the 
hayfield! Let us make it a point of honour to get in the harvest more quickly 
than Jones and his men could do.’ 

But at this moment the three cows, who had seemed uneasy for some time 
past, set up a loud lowing. They had not been milked for twenty-four hours, 
and their udders were almost bursting. After a little thought, the pigs sent for 
buckets and milked the cows fairly successfully, their trotters being well 
adapted to this task. Soon there were five buckets of frothing creamy milk at 
which many of the animals looked with considerable interest. 

‘What is going to happen to all that milk?’ said someone. 

‘Jones used sometimes to mix some of it in our mash,’ said one of the hens. 

‘Never mind the milk, comrades!’ cried Napoleon, placing himself in front 
of the buckets. ‘That will be attended to. The harvest is more important. 
Comrade Snowball will lead the way. I shall follow in a few minutes. Forward, 
comrades! The hay is waiting.’ 

So the animals trooped down to the hayfield to begin the harvest, and when 
they came back in the evening it was noticed that the milk had disappeared. 


3 


How they toiled and sweated to get the hay in! But their efforts were rewarded, 
for the harvest was an even bigger success than they had hoped. 

Sometimes the work was hard; the implements had been designed for 
human beings and not for animals, and it was a great drawback that no animal 
was able to use any tool that involved standing on his hind legs. But the pigs 
were so clever that they could think of a way round every difficulty. As for the 
horses, they knew every inch of the field, and in fact understood the business of 
mowing and raking far better than Jones and his men had ever done. The pigs 
did not actually work, but directed and supervised the others. With their 
superior knowledge it was natural that they should assume the leadership. 
Boxer and Clover would harness themselves to the cutter or the horse-rake (no 
bits or reins were needed in these days, of course) and tramp steadily round 
and round the field with a pig walking behind and calling out ‘Gee up, 
comrade!’ or ‘Whoa back, comrade!’ as the case might be. And every animal 
down to the humblest worked at turning the hay and gathering it. Even the 
ducks and hens toiled to and fro all day in the sun, carrying tiny wisps of hay in 
their beaks. In the end they finished the harvest in two days’ less time than it 
had usually taken Jones and his men. Moreover, it was the biggest harvest that 
the farm had ever seen. There was no wastage whatever; the hens and ducks 
with their sharp eyes had gathered up the very last stalk. And not an animal on 
the farm had stolen so much as a mouthful. 



Animal Farm 


23 

All through that summer the work of the farm went like clockwork. The 
animals were happy as they had never conceived it possible to be. Every 
mouthful of food was an acute positive pleasure, now that it was truly their 
own food, produced by themselves and for themselves, not doled out to them 
by a grudging master. With the worthless parasitical human beings gone, there 
was more for everyone to eat. There was more leisure too, inexperienced 
though the animals were. They met with many difficulties-for instance, later 
in the year, when they harvested the corn, they had to tread it out in the ancient 
style and blow away the chaff with their breath, since the farm possessed no 
threshing machine-but the pigs with their cleverness and Boxer with his 
tremendous muscles always pulled them through. Boxer was the admiration of 
everybody. He had been a hard worker even in Jones’s time, but now he 
seemed more like three horses than one,* there were days when the entire work 
of the farm seemed to rest upon his mighty shoulders. From morning to night 
he was pushing and pulling, always at the spot where the work was hardest. He 
had made an arrangement with one of the cockerels to call him in the mornings 
half an hour earlier than anyone else, and would put in some volunteer labour 
at whatever seemed to be most needed, before the regular day’s work began. 
His answer to every problem, every setback, was T will work harderF-which 
he had adopted as his personal motto. 

But everyone worked according to his capacity. The hens and ducks, for 
instance, saved five bushels, of corn at the harvest by gathering up the stray 
grains. Nobody stole, nobody grumbled over his rations, the quarrelling and 
biting and jealousy which had been normal features of life in the old days had 
almost disappeared. Nobody shirked— or almost nobody. Mollie, it was true, 
was not good at getting up in the morning, and had a way of leaving work early 
on the ground that there was a stone in her hoof. And the behaviour of the cat 
was somewhat peculiar. It was soon noticed that when there was work to be 
done the cat could never be found. She would vanish for hours on end, and 
then reappear at meal-times, or in the evening after work was over, as though 
nothing had happened. But she always made such excellent excuses, and 
purred so affectionately, that it was impossible not to believe in her good 
intentions. Old Benjamin, the donkey, seemed quite unchanged since the 
Rebellion. He did his work in the same slow obstinate way as he had done it in 
Jones’s time, never shirking, and never volunteering for extra work either. 
About the Rebellion and its results he would express no opinion. When asked 
whether he was not happier now that Jones was gone, he would say only 
‘Donkeys live a long time. None of you has ever seen a dead donkey,’ and the 
others had to be content with this cryptic answer. 

On Sundays there was no work. Breakfast was an hour later than usual, and 
after breakfast there was a ceremony which was observed every week without 
fail. First came the hoisting of the flag. Snowball had found in the harness- 
room an old green tablecloth of Mrs Jones’s and had painted on it a hoof and a 
horn in white. This was run up the flagstaff in the farmhouse garden every 
Sunday, morning. The flag was green. Snowball explained, to represent the 
green fields of Engl and ,- while the hoof and hom signified die future Republic 



Animal Farm 


24 

of the Animals which would arise when the human race had been finally 
overthrown. After the hoisting of the flag all the animals trooped into the big 
barn_for a general assembly which was known as the Meeting. Here the work of 
the coming week was planned out and resolutions were put forward and 
debated. It was always the pigs who put forward the resolutions. The other 
animals understood how to vote, but could never think of any resolutions of 
their own. Snowball and Napoleon were by far the most active in the debates. 
But it was noticed that these two were never in agreement: whatever 
suggestion either of them made, the other could be counted on to oppose it. 
Even when it was resolved-a thing no one could object to in itself-to set aside 
a small paddock behind the orchard as a home of rest for animals who were past 
work, there was a stormy debate over the correct retiring age for each class of 
animal. The meeting always ended with the singing of ‘Beasts of England’, and 
the afternoon was given up to recreation. 

The pigs had set aside the harness-room as a headquarters for themselves. 
Here, in the evening, they studied blacksmithing, carpentering, and other 
necessary arts from books which they had brought out of the farmhouse. 
Snowball also busied himself with organizing the other animals into what he 
called Animal Committees. He was indefatigable at this. He formed the Egg 
Production Committee for the hens, the Clean Tails League for the cows, the 
Wild Comrades’ Re-education Committee (the object of this was to tame the 
rats and rabbits), the Whiter Wool Movement for the sheep, and various 
others, besides instituting classes in reading and writing. On the whole, these 
projects were a failure. The attempt to tame the wild creatures, for instance, 
broke down almost immediately. They continued to behave very much as 
before, and when treated with generosity, simply took advantage of it. The cat 
joined the Re-education Committee and was very active in it for some days. 
She was seen one day sitting on a roof and talking to some sparrows who were 
just out of her reach. She was telling them that all animals were now comrades 
and that any sparrow who chose could come and perch on her paw; but the 
sparrows kept their distance. 

The reading and writing classes, however, were a great success. By the 
autumn almost every animal on the farm was literate in some degree. 

As for the pigs, they could already read and write perfectly. The dogs 
learned to read fairly well, but were not interested in reading any thin g except 
the Seven Commandments. Muriel, the goat, could read somewhat better than 
the dogs, and sometimes used to read to the others in the evenings from scraps 
of newspaper which she found on the rubbish heap. Benjamin could read as 
well as any pig, but never exercised his faculty. So far as he knew, he said, there 
was nothing worth reading. Clover learnt the whole alphabet, but could not 
put words together. Boxer could not get beyond the letter D. He would trace 
out A, B, C, D, in the dust with his great hoof, and then would stand staring at 
the letters with his ears b ack, sometimes shaking his forelock, trying with all 
his might to remember what came next and never succeeding. On several 
occasions, indeed, he did learn E, F, G, H, and by the time he knew them, it 
was always discovered that he had forgotten A, B, C, and D. Finally he decided 



Animal Farm 25 

to be content with the first four letters, and used to write them out once or 
twice every day to refresh his memory. Mollie refused to learn any but the six 
letters which spelt her own name. She would form these very neatly out of 
pieces of twig, and would then decorate them with a flower or two and walk 
round them admiring them. 

None of the other animals on the farm could get further than the letter A. It 
was also found that the stupider animals, such as the sheep, hens, and ducks, 
were unable to learn the Seven Commandments by heart. After much thought 
Snowball declared that the Seven Commandments could in effect be reduced 
to a single maxim, namely: ‘Four legs good, two legs bad.’ This, he said, 
contained the essential principle of Animalism. Whoever had thoroughly 
grasped it would be safe from human influences. The birds at first objected, 
since it seemed to them that they also had two legs, but Snowball proved to 
them that this was not so. 

‘A bird’s wing, comrades,’ he said, ‘is an organ of propulsion and not of 
manipulation. It should therefore be regarded as a leg. The distinguishing 
mark of Man is the hand, the instrument with which he does all his mischief.’ 

The birds did not understand Snowball’s long words, but they accepted his 
explanation, and all the humbler animals set to work to learn the new maxim 
by heart, four legs good, two legs bad, was inscribed on the end wall of the 
barn, above the Seven Commandments and in bigger letters. When they had 
once got it by heart, the sheep developed a great liking for this maxim, and 
often as they lay in the field they would all start bleating ‘Four legs good, two 
legs bad! Four legs good, two legs bad!’ and keep it up for hours on end, never 
growing tired of it. 

Napoleon took no interest in Snowball’s committees. He said that the 
education of the young was more important than anything that could be done 
for those who were already grown up. It happened that Jessie and Bluebell had 
both whelped soon after the hay harvest, giving birth between them to nine 
sturdy puppies. As soon as they were weaned, Napoleon took them away from 
their mothers, saying that he would make himself responsible for their 
education. He took them up into a loft which could only be reached by a ladder 
from the harness-room, and there kept them in such seclusion that the rest of 
the farm soon forgot their existence. 

The mystery of where the milk went to was soon cleared up. It was mixed 
every day into the pigs’ mash. The early apples were now ripening, and the 
grass of the orchard was littered with windfalls. The animals had assumed as a 
matter of course that these would be shared out equally; one day, however, the 
order went forth that all the windfalls were to be collected and brought to the 
harness-room for the use of the pigs. At this some of the other animals 
murmured, but it was no use. All the pigs were in full agreement on this point, 
even Snowball and Napoleon. Squealer was sent to make the necessary 
explanation to the others. 

‘Comrades!’ he cried. ‘You do not imagine, I hope, that we pigs are doing 
this in a spirit of selfishness and privilege? Many of us actually dislike mUfe and 
apples. I dislike them myself. Our sole object in taking these things is to 



26 


Animal Farm 


preserve our health. Milk and apples (this has been proved by Science, 
comrades) contain substances absolutely necessary to the well-being of a pig. 
We pigs are brain-workers. The whole management and organization of this 
farm depend on us. Day and night we are watching over your welfare. It is for 
your sake that we drink that milk and. eat those apples. Do you know what 
would happen if we pigs failed in our duty? Jones would come back! Yes, Jones 
would come back! Surely, comrades,’ cried Squealer almost pleadingly, 
skipping from side to side and whisking his tail, ‘surely there is no one among 
you who wants to see Jones come back?’- 
Now if there was one thing that the animals were completely certain of, it 
was that they did not want Jones back. When it was put to them in this light,, 
they had no more to say. The importance of keeping the pigs in good health 
was all too obvious. So it was agreed without further argument that the milk 
and the windfall apples (and also the main crop of apples when they ripened) 
should be reserved for the pigs alone. 


4 


By the late summer the news of what had happened on Animal Farm had 
spread across half the country Every day Snowball and Napoleon sent out 
flights of pigeons whose instructions were to mingle with the ammals on 
neighbouring farms, tell them the story of the Rebellion, and teach them the 
tune of ‘Beasts of England’. 

Most of this time Mr Jones had spent sitting in the taproom of the Red Lion 
at Willingdon, complaining to anyone who would listen to the monstrous 
injustice he had suffered in being turned out of his property by a pack of good- 
for-nothing animals. The other farmers sympathized in principle, but they did 
not at first give him much help. At heart, each of them was secretly wondering 
whether he could not somehow turn Jones’s misfortune to his own advantage. 
It was lucky that the owners of the two farms which adjoined Animal Farm 
were on permanently bad terms. One of them, which was named Foxwood, 
was a large, neglected, old-fashioned farm, much overgrown by woodland, 
with all its pastures worn out and its hedges in a disgraceful condition. Its 
owner, Mr Pilkington, was an easy-going gentleman farmer who spent most of 
his time in fishing or hunting according to the season. The other farm, which 
was called Pinchfield, was smaller and better kept. Its owner was a Mr 
Frederick, a tough, shrewd man, perpetually involved in lawsuits and with a 
name for driving hard bargains. These two disliked each other so much that it 
was difficult for them to come to any agreement, even in defence of their own 
interests. 

Nevertheless they were both thoroughly frightened by the rebellion on 



Animal Farm 27 

Animal Farm, and very anxious to prevent their own animals from learning too 
much about it. At first they pretended to laugh to scorn the idea of animals 
managing a farm for themselves. The whole thing would be over in a fortnight, 
they said. They put it about that the animals on the Manor Farm (they insisted 
on calling it the Manor Farm; they would not tolerate the name ‘Animal 
Farm’) were perpetually fighting among themselves and were also rapidly 
starving to death. When time passed and the animals had evidently not starved 
to death, Frederick and Pilkington changed their tune and began to talk of the 
terrible wickedness that now flourished on Animal Farm. It was given out that 
the animals there practised cannibalism, tortured one another with red-hot 
horseshoes, and had their females in common. This was what came of rebelling 
against the laws of Nature, Frederick and Pilkington said. 

However, these stories were never fully believed. Rumours of a wonderful 
farm, where the human beings had been turned out and the animals managed 
their own affairs, continued to circulate in vague and distorted forms, and 
throughout that year a wave of rebelliousness ran through the countryside. 
Bulls which had always been tractable suddenly turned savage, sheep broke 
down hedges and devoured the clover, cows kicked the pail over, hunters 
refused their fences and shot their riders on to the other side. Above all, the 
tune and even the words of ‘Beasts of England’ were known everywhere. It had 
spread with astonishing speed. The human beings could not contain their rage 
when they heard this song, though they pretended to think it merely 
ridiculous. They could not understand, they said, how even animals could 
bring themselves to sing such contemptible rubbish. Any animal caught 
singing it was given a flogging on the spot. And yet the song was irrepressible. 
The blackbirds whistled it in the hedges, the pigeons cooed it in the elms, it got 
into the din of the smithies and the time of the church bells. And when the 
human beings listened to it, they secretly trembled, hearing in it a prophecy of 
their future doom. 

Early in October, when the corn was cut and stacked and some of it was 
already threshed, a flight of pigeons came whirling through the air and alighted 
in the yard of Animal Farm in the wildest excitement. Jones and all his men, 
with half a dozen others from Foxwood and Pinchfield, had entered the five- 
barred gate and were coming up the cart-track that led to the farm. They were 
all carrying sticks, except Jones, who was marching ahead with a gun in his 
hands. Obviously they were going to attempt the recapture of the farm. 

This had long been expected, and all preparations had been made. 
Snowball, who had studied an old book of Julius Caesar’s campaigns which he 
had found in the farmhouse, was in charge of the defensive operations. He gave 
his orders quickly, and in a couple of minutes every animal was at his post. 

As the human beings approached the farm buildings. Snowball launched his 
first attack. All the pigeons, to the number of thirty-five, flew to and fro over 
the men’s heads and muted upon them from mid-air; and while the men were 
dealing with this, the geese, who had been hiding behind the hedge, rushed out 
and pecked viciously at the calves of their legs. However, this was only a light 
skirmishing manoeuvre, intended to create a little disorder, and die men easily 



28 


Animal Farm 


drove the geese off with their sticks. Snowball now launched his second line of 
attack. Muriel, Benjamin, and all the sheep, with Snowball at the head of them, 
rushed forward and prodded and butted the men from every side, while 
Benjamin turned round and lashed at them with his small hoofs. But once 
again the men, with their sticks and their hobnailed boots, were too strong for 
them; and suddenly, at a squeal from Snowball, which was the signal for 
retreat, all the animals turned and fled through the gateway into the yard. 

The men gave a shout of triumph. They saw, as they imagined, their 
enemies in flight, and they rushed after them in disorder. This was just what 
Snowball had intended. As soon as they were well inside the yard, the three 
horses, the three cows, and the rest of the pigs, who had been lying in ambush 
in the cowshed, suddenly emerged m their rear, cutting them off. Snowball 
now gave the signal for the charge. He himself dashed straight for Jones. Jones 
saw him coming, raised his gun, and fired. The pellets scored bloody streaks 
along Snowball’s back, and a sheep dropped dead. Without halting for an 
instant Snowball flung his fifteen stone against Jones’s legs. Jones was hurled 
into a pile of dung and his gun flew out of his hands. But the most terrifying 
spectacle of all was Boxer, rearing up on his hind legs and striking out with his 
great iron-shod hoofs like a stallion. His very first blow took a stable-lad from 
Foxwood on the skull and stretched him lifeless in the mud. At the sight, 
several men dropped their sticks and tried to run. Panic overtook them and the 
next moment all the animals together were chasing them round and round the 
yard. They were gored, kicked, bitten, trampled on. There was not an animal 
on the farm that did not take vengeance on them after his own fashion. Even 
the cat suddenly leapt off a roof on to a cowman’s shoulders and sank her claws 
in his neck, at which he yelled horribly. At a moment when the opening was 
clear, the men were glad enough to rush out of the yard and make a bolt for the 
main road. And so within five minutes of their invasion they were in 
ignominious retreat by the same way as they had come, with a flock of geese 
hissing after them and pecking at their calves all the way. 

All the men were gone except one. Back in the yard Boxer was pawing with 
his hoof at the stable-lad who lay face down in the mud, trying to turn him 
over. The boy did not stir, 

‘He is dead,’ said Boxer sorrowfully. ‘I had no intention of doing that. I 
forgot that I was wearing iron shoes. Who will believe that I did not do this on 
purpose?’ 

‘No sentimentality, comrade!’ cried Snowball, from whose wounds the 
blood was still dripping, ‘War is war. The only good human being is a dead 
one.’ 

‘I have no wish to take life, not even human life,’ repeated Boxer, and his 
eyes were full of tears, 

‘Where is Mollie?’ exclaimed somebody. 

Mollie was in fact missing. For a moment there was great alarm; it was 
feared that the men might have harmed her in some way, or even carried her off 
with them. In the end, however, she was found hiding in her stall with her head 
buried among the hay in the manger. She had taken to flight as soon as the gun 



Animal Farm 29 

went off. And when the others came back from looking for her, it was to find 
that the stable-lad, who in fact was only stunned, had already recovered and 
made off. 

The animals had now reassembled in the wildest excitement, each 
recounting his own exploits in the battle at the top of his voice. An impromptu 
celebration of the victory was held immediately. The flag was run up and 
‘Beasts of England’ was sung a number of times, then the sheep who had been 
killed was given a solemn funeral, a hawthorn bush being planted on her grave. 
At the graveside Snowball made a little speech, emphasizing the need for all 
animals to be ready to die for Animal Farm if need be. 

The animals decided unanimously to create a military decoration, ‘Animal 
Hero, First Class’, which was conferred there and then on Snowball and 
Boxer. It consisted of a brass medal (they were really some old horse-brasses 
which had been found in the harness-room), to be worn on Sundays and 
holidays. There was also ‘Animal Hero, Second Class’, which was conferred 
posthumously on the dead sheep. 

There was much discussion as to what the battle should be called. In the 
end, it was named the Battle of the Cowshed, since that was where the ambush 
had been sprung. Mr Jones’s gun had been found lying in the mud, and it was 
known that there was a supply of cartridges m the farmhouse. It was decided to 
set the gun up at the foot of the flagstaff, like a piece of artillery, and to fire it 
twice a year-once on October the twelfth, the anniversary of the Battle of the 
Cowshed, and once on Midsummer Day, the anniversary of the Rebellion. 


5 


As winter drew on, Mollie became more and more troublesome. She was late 
for work every morning and excused herself by saying that she had overslept, 
and she complained of mysterious pains, although her appetite was excellent. 
On every kind of pretext she would run away from work and go to the drinking 
pool, where she would stand foolishly gazing at her own reflection in the water. 
But there were also rumours of something more serious. One day as Mollie 
strolled blithely into the yard, flirting her long tail and chewing at a stalk of 
hay, Clover took her aside. 

‘Mollie, 5 she said, ‘I have something very serious to say to you. This 
morning I saw you looking over the hedge that divides Animal Farm from 
Foxwood. One of Mr Pilkington’s men was standing on the other side of the 
hedge. And - 1 was a long way away, but I am almost certain I saw this-he was 
talking to you and you were allowing him to stroke your nose. What does that 
mean, Mollie? 5 

‘He didn’t! I wasn’t! It isn’t true!’ cried Mollie, beginning to prance about 



Animal Farm 


30 

and paw the ground. 

‘Mollie! Look me in the face. Do you give me your word of honour that the 
man was not stroking your nose?’ 

‘It isn’t true!’ repeated Mollie, but she could not look Clover in the face, and 
the next moment she took to her heels and galloped away into the field. 

A thought struck Clover. Without saying anything to the others, she went to 
Mollie’s stall and turned over the straw with her hoof. Hidden under the straw 
was a little pile of lump sugar and several bunches of ribbon of different 
colours. 

Three days later Mollie disappeared. For some weeks nothing was known of 
her whereabouts, then the pigeons reported that they had seen her on the other 
side of Willingdon. She was between the shafts of a smart dogcart painted red 
and black, which was standing outside a public-house. A fat red-faced man in 
check breeches and gaiters, who looked like a publican, was stroking her nose 
and feeding her with sugar. Her coat was newly clipped and she wore a scarlet 
ribbon round her forelock. She appeared to be enjoying herself, so the pigeons 
said. None of the animals ever mentioned Mollie again. 

In January there came bitterly hard weather. The earth was like iron, and 
nothing could be done in the fields. Many meetings were held in the big bam, 
and the pigs occupied themselves with planning out the work of the coming 
season. It had come to be accepted that the pigs, who were manifestly cleverer 
than the other animals, should decide all questions of farm policy, though their 
decisions had to be ratified by a majority vote. This arrangement would have 
worked well enough if it had not been for the disputes between Snowball and 
Napoleon. These two disagreed at every point where disagreement was 
possible. If one of them suggested sowing a bigger acreage with barley, the 
other was certain to demand a bigger acreage of oats, and if one of them said 
that such and such a field was just right for cabbages, the other would declare 
that it was useless for anything except roots. Each had his own following, and 
there were some violent debates. At the meetings Snowball often won over the 
majority by his brilliant speeches, but Napoleon was better at canvassing 
support for himself in between times. He was especially successful with the 
sheep. Of late the sheep had taken to bleating ‘Four legs good, two legs bad’ 
both in and out of season, and they often interrupted the Meeting with this. It 
was noticed that they were especially liable to break into ‘Four legs good, two 
legs bad’ at the crucial moments in Snowball’s speeches. Snowball had made a 
close study of some back numbers of the Farmer and Stockbreeder which he 
had found in the farmhouse, and was full of plans for innovations and 
improvements. He talked learnedly about field-drains, silage, and basic slag, 
and? had worked out a complicated scheme for all the animals to drop their 
dun^afeectly in the fields, at a different spot every day, to save the labour of 
cartage. Napoleon produced no schemes of his own, but said quietly that 
Snowball’s would come to nothing, and seemed to be biding his time. But of all 
their controversies, none was so bitter as the one that took place over the 
windmill. 

In the long pasture, not far from the farm buildings , there was a small knoll 



Animal Farm 


which was the highest point on the farm. After surveying the ground. 
Snowball declared that this was just the place for a windmill, which could be 
made to operate a dynamo and supply the farm with electrical power. This 
would light the stalls and warm them in winter, and would also run a circular 
saw, a chaff-cutter, a mangel-slicer, and an electric milking machine. The 
animals had never heard of anything of this kind before (for the farm was an 
old-fashioned one and had only the most primitive machinery), and they 
listened in astonishment while Snowball conjured up pictures of fantastic 
machines which would do their work for them while they grazed at their ease in 
the fields or improved their minds with reading and conversation. 

Within a few weeks Snowball’s plans for the windmill were fully worked 
out. The mechanical details came mostly from three books which had 
belonged to Mr Jones-One Thousand Useful Things to Do About the House , 
Every Man His Own Bricklayer, and Electricity for Beginners. Snowball used as 
his study a shed which had once been used for incubators and had a smooth 
wooden floor suitable for drawing on. He was closeted there for hours at a time. 
With his books held open by a stone, and with a piece of chalk gripped between 
the knuckles of his trotter, he would move rapidly to and fro, drawing in line 
after line and uttering little whimpers of excitement. Gradually the plans grew 
into a complicated mass of cranks and cog-wheels, covering more than half the 
floor, which the other animals found completely unintelligible but very 
impressive. All of them came to look at Snowball’s drawings at least once a 
day. Even the hens and ducks came, and were at pains not to tread on the chalk 
marks. Only Napoleon held aloof. He had declared himself against the 
windmill from the start. One day, however, he arrived unexpectedly to 
examine the plans. He walked heavily round the shed, looked closely at every 
detail of the plans and snuffed at them once or twice, then stood for a little 
while contemplating them out of the corner of his eye; then suddenly he lifted 
his leg, urinated over the plans, and walked out without uttering a word. 

The whole farm was deeply divided on the subject of the windmill. 
Snowball did not deny that to build it would be a difficult business. Stone 
would have to be quarried and built up into walls, then the sails would have to 
be made and after that there would be need for dynamos and cables. (How 
these were to be procured. Snowball did not say.) But he maintained that it 
could all be done in a year. And thereafter, he declared, so much labour would 
be saved that the animals would only need to work three days a week. 
Napoleon, on the other hand, argued that the great need of the moment was to 
increase food production, and that if they wasted time on the windmill they 
would all starve to death. The animals formed themselves into two factions 
under the slogans, ‘Vote for Snowball and the three-day week’ and ‘Vote for 
Napoleon and the full manger 5 . Benjamin was the only animal who did not side 
with either faction. He refused to believe either that food would become more 
plentiful or that the windmill would save work. Windmill or no windmill, he 
said, life would go on as it had always gone on-that is, badly. 

Apart from the disputes over the windmill, there was the question of die 
defence of the farm- ft was fully realized that though the human beings had 



Animal Farm 


32 

been defeated in the Battle of the Cowshed they might make another and more 
determined attempt to recapture the farm and reinstate Mr Jones. They had all 
the more reason for doing so because the news of their defeat had spread across 
the countryside and made the animals on the neighbouring farms more restive 
than ever. As usual. Snowball and Napoleon were in disagreement. According 
to Napoleon, what the animals must do was to procure fire-arms and train 
themselves in the use of them. According to Snowball, they must send out 
more and more pigeons and stir up rebellion among the animals on the other 
farms. The one argued that if they could not defend themselves they were 
bound to be conquered, the other argued that if rebellions happened 
everywhere they would have no need to defend themselves. The animals 
listened first to Napoleon, then to Snowball, and could not make up their 
minds which was right; indeed, they always found themselves in agreement 
with the one who was speaking at the moment. 

At last the day came when Snowball’s plans were completed. At the Meeting 
on the following Sunday the question of whether or not to begin work on the 
windmill was to be put to the vote. When the animals had assembled in the big 
barn. Snowball stood up and, though occasionally interrupted by bleating 
from the sheep, set forth his reasons for advocating the building of the 
windmill. Then Napoleon stood up to reply. He said very quietly that the 
windmill was nonsense and that he advised nobody to vote for it, promptly sat 
down again; he had spoken for barely thirty seconds, and seemed almost 
indifferent as to the effect he produced. At this Snowball sprang to his feet, and 
shouting down the sheep, who had began bleating again, broke into a 
passionate appeal in favour of the windmill. Until now the animals had been 
about equally divided in their sympathies, but in a moment Snowball’s 
eloquence had carried them away. In glowing sentences he painted a picture of 
Animal Farm as it might be when sordid labour was lifted from the animals’ 
backs. His imagination had now run far beyond chaff-cutters and turnip- 
slicers. Electricity, he said, could operate threshing machines, ploughs, 
harrows, rollers, and reapers and binders, besides supplying every stall with its 
own electric light, hot and cold water, and an electric heater. By the time he 
had finished speaking, there was no doubt as to which way the vote would go. 
But just at this moment Napoleon stood up and, casting a peculiar sidelong 
look at Snowball, uttered a high-pitched whimper of a kind no one had ever 
heard him utter before. 

At this there was a terrible baying sound outside, and nine enormous dogs 
wearing brass-studded collars came bounding into the barn. They dashed 
straight for Snowball, who only sprang from his place just in time to escape 
their snapping jaws. In a moment he was out of the door and they were after 
him. Too amazed and frightened to speak, all the animals crowded through the 
door to watch the chase. Snowball was racing across the long pasture that led to 
the road. He was running as only a pig can run, but the dogs were close on his 
heels. Suddenly he slipped and it seemed certain that they had him. Then he 
was Up again, running faster than ever, then the dogs were gaining on him 
again. One of them all but closed his jaws on Snowball’s tail, but Snowball 



Animal Farm 


33 

whisked it free just in time. Then he put on an extra spurt and, with a few 
inches to spare, slipped through a hole in the hedge and was seen no more. 

Silent and terrified, the animals crept back into the barn. In a moment the 
dogs came bounding back. At first no one had been able to imagine where these 
creatures came from, but the problem was soon solved: they were the puppies 
whom Napoleon had taken away from their mothers and reared privately. 
Though not yet full-grown, they were huge dogs, and as fierce-looking as 
wolves. They kept close to Napoleon. It was noticed that they wagged their 
tails to him in the same way as the other dogs had been used to do to Mr Jones. 

Napoleon, with the dogs following him, now mounted on to the raised 
portion of the floor where Major had previously stood to deliver his speech. He 
announced that from now on the Sunday morning Meetings would come to an 
end. They were unnecessary, he said, and wasted time. In future all questions 
relating to the working of the farm would be settled by a special committee of 
pigs, presided over by himself. These would meet in private and afterwards 
communicate their decisions to the others. The animals would still assemble 
on Sunday mornings to salute the flag, sing ‘Beasts of England 5 , and receive 
their orders for the week; but there would be no more debates. 

In spite of the shock that Snowball’s expulsion had given them, the animals 
were dismayed by this announcement. Several of them would have protested if 
they could have found the right arguments. Even Boxer was vaguely troubled. 
He set his ears back, shook his forelock several times, and tried hard to marshal 
his thoughts; but in the end he could not think of anything to say. Some of the 
pigs themselves, however, were more articulate. Four young porkers in the 
front row uttered shrill squeals of disapproval, and all four of them sprang to 
their feet and began speaking at once But suddenly the dogs sitting round 
Napoleon let out deep, menacing growls, and the pigs fell silent and sat down 
again. Then the sheep broke out into a tremendous bleating of ‘Four legs good, 
two legs bad!’ which went on for nearly a quarter of an hour and put an end to 
any chance of discussion. 

Afterwards Squealer was sent round the farm to explain the new 
arrangements to the others. 

‘Comrades,’ he said, ‘I trust that every animal here appreciates the sacrifice 
that Comrade Napoleon has made in taking this extra labour upon himself. Do 
not imagine, comrade, that leadership is a pleasure! On the contrary, it is a 
deep and heavy responsibility. No one believes more firmly than Comrade 
Napoleon that all animals are equal. He would be only too happy to let you 
make your decisions for yourselves. But sometimes you might make the wrong 
decisions, comrades, and then where should we be? Suppose you had decided 
to follow Snowball, with his moonshine of windmills-Snowball, who, as we 
now* know, was no better than a criminal?’ 

‘He fought bravely at the Battle of the Cowshed,’ said somebody. 

‘Bravery is not enough,* said Squealer. ‘Loyalty and obedience are more 
important. And as to the Battle Of the Cowshed, I believe the time will come 
when we shall find that Snowball’s part in it was much exaggerated. 
Discipline, comrades, iron discipline! Thai is the watchword for today. Ofie 



34 Animal Farm 

false step, and our enemies would be upon us. Surely, comrades,. you do not 
want Jones back?’ 

Once again this argument was unanswerable. Certainly the animals did not 
want Jones back; if the holding of debates on Sunday mornings was liable to 
bring him back, then the debates must stop. Boxer, who had now had time to 
think things over, voiced the general feeling by saying: ‘if Comrade Napoleon 
says it, it must be right’. And from then on he adopted the maxim, ‘Napoleon is 
always right,’ in addition to his private motto of ‘I will work harder.’ 

By this time the weather had broken and the spring ploughing had begun. 
The shed where Snowball had drawn his plans of the windmill had been shut 
up and it was assumed that the plans had been rubbed off the floor. Every 
Sunday morning at ten o’clock the animals assembled in the big barn to receive 
their orders for the week. The skull of old Major, now clean of flesh, had been 
disinterred from the orchard and set up on a stump at the foot of the flagstaff, 
beside the gun. After the hoisting of the flag, the animals were required to file 
past the skull in a reverent manner before entering the barn. Nowadays they 
did not sit all together as they had done in the past. Napoleon, with Squealer 
and another pig named Minimus, who had a remarkable gift for composing 
songs and poems, sat on the front of the raised platform, with the nine young 
dogs forming a semicircle round them, and the other pigs sitting behind. The 
rest of the animals sat facing them in the main body of the barn. Napoleon read 
out the orders for the week in a gruff soldierly style, and after a single singing 
of ‘Beasts of England’, all the animals dispersed. 

On the third Sunday after Snowball’s expulsion, the animals were somewhat 
surprised to hear Napoleon announce that the windmill was to be built after 
all. He did not give any reasons for having changed his mind, but merely 
warned the animals that this extra task would mean very hard work; it might 
even be necessary to reduce their rations. The plans, however, had all been 
prepared, down to the last detail. A special committee of pigs had been at work 
upon them for the past three weeks. The building of the windmill, with various 
other improvements, was expected to take two years. 

That evening Squealer explained privately to the other animals that Napo- 
leon had never in reality been opposed to the windmill. On the contrary, it was 
he who had advocated it in the beginning, and the plan which Snowball had 
drawn on the floor of the incubator shed had actually been stolen from among 
Napoleon’s papers. The windmill was, in fact, Napoleon’s own creation. Why, 
then, asked somebody, had he spoken so strongly against it? Here Squealer 
looked very sly. That, he said, was Comrade Napoleon’s cunning. He had 
seemed, to oppose the windmill, simply as a manoeuvre to get rid of Snowball, 
who was a dangerous character and a bad influence. Now that Snowball was 
out of the way, the plan could go forward without his interference. This, said 
Squealer, was something called tactics. He repeated a number of times, 
‘Tactics, comrades, tactics!’ skipping round and whisking his tail with a merry 
laugh. The animals were not certain what the word meant, but Squealer spoke so 
persuasively, and the three dogs who happened to be with him growled so 
threateningly, that they accepted his explanation without further questions. 



6 


All that year the animals worked like slaves. But they were happy in their work; 
they grudged no effort or sacrifice, well aware that everything that they did was 
for the benefit of themselves and those of their kind who would come after 
them, and not for a pack of idle., thieving human beings. 

Throughout the spring and summer they worked a sixty-hour week, and in 
August Napoleon announced that there would be work on Sunday afternoons 
as well. This work was strictly voluntary, but any animal who absented himself 
from it would have his rations reduced by half. Even so, it was found necessary 
to leave certain tasks undone. The harvest was a little less successful than in the 
previous year, and two fields which should have been sown with roots in the 
early summer were not sown because the ploughing had not been completed 
early enough. It was possible to foresee that the coming winter would be a hard 
one. 

The windmill presented unexpected difficulties. There was a good quarry of 
limestone on the farm, and plenty of sand and cement had been found in one of 
the outhouses, so that all the materials for building were at hand. But the 
problem the animals could not at first solve was how to break up the stones into 
pieces of suitable size. There seemed no way of doing this except with picks 
and crowbars, which no animal could use, because no animal could stand on 
his hind legs. Only after weeks of vain effort did the right idea occur to 
somebody-namely, to utilize the force of gravity. Huge boulders, far too big to 
be used as they were, were lying all over the bed of the quarry. The animals 
lashed ropes round these, and then all together, cows, horses, sheep, any 
animal that could lay hold of the rope- even the pigs sometimes joined in at 
critical moments -they dragged them with desperate slowness up the slope to 
the top of the quarry, where they were toppled over the edge, to shatter to 
pieces below. Transporting the stone when it was once broken was 
comparatively simple. The horses carried it off in cartloads, the sheep dragged 
single blocks, even Muriel and Benjamin yoked themselves into an old 
governess-cart and did their share. By late summer a sufficient store of stone 
had accumulated, and then the building began, under the superintendence of 
the pigs. 

But it was a slow, laborious process. Frequently it took a whole day of 
exhausting effort to drag a single boulder to the top of the quarry, and 
sometimes when it was pushed over the edge it failed to break. Nothing could 
have been achieved without Boxer, whose strength seemed equal to that of ah 



Animal Farm 


36 

the rest of the animals put together. When the boulder began to slip and the 
animals cried out in despair at finding themselves dragged down the hill, it was 
always Boxer who strained himself against the rope and brought the boulder to 
a stop. To see him toiling up the slope inch by inch, his breath coming fast, the 
tips of his hoofs clawing at the ground, and his great sides matted with sweat, 
filled everyone with admiration. Clover warned him sometimes to be careful 
not to overstrain himself, but Boxer would never listen to her. His two slogans, 
T will work harder’ and ‘Napoleon is always right’, seemed to him a sufficient 
answer to all problems. He had made arrangements with the cockerel to call 
him three-quarters of an hour earlier in the morning instead of half an hour. 
And in his spare moments, of which there were not many nowadays, he would 
go alone to the quarry, collect a load of broken stone, and drag it down to the 
site of the windmill unassisted. 

The animals were not badly off throughout that summer, in spite of 'the 
hardness of their work. If they had no more food than they had in Jones’s day, 
at least they did not have less. The advantage of only having to feed 
themselves, and not having to support five extravagant human beings as well, 
was so great that it would have taken a lot of failures to outweigh it. And in 
many ways the animal method of doing things was more efficient and saved 
labour. Such jobs as weeding, for instance, could be done with a thoroughness 
impossible to human beings. And again, since no animal now stole, it was 
unnecessary to fence off pasture from arable land, which saved a lot of labour 
on the upkeep of hedges and gates. Nevertheless, as the summer wore on, 
various unforeseen shortages began to make themselves felt. There was need of 
paraffin oil, nails, string, dog biscuits, and iron for the horses’ shoes, none of 
which could be produced on the farm. Later there would also be need for seeds 
and artificial manure, besides various tools and, finally, the machinery for the 
windmill. How these were to be procured, no one was able to imagine. 

One Sunday morning, when the animals assembled to receive their orders, 
Napoleon announced that he had decided upon a new policy. From now 
onwards Animal Farm would engage in trade with the neighbouring farms: 
not, of course, for any commercial purpose, but simply in order to obtain 
certain materials which were urgently necessary. The needs of the windmill 
must override everything else, he said. He was therefore making arrangements 
to sell a stack of hay and part of the current year’s wheat crop, and later on, if 
more money were needed, it would have to be made up by the sale of eggs, for 
which there was always a market in Willingdon. The hens, said Napoleon, 
should welcome this sacrifice as their own special contribution towards the 
building of the windmill. 

Once again the animals were conscious of a vague uneasiness. Never to have 
any dealings with human beings, never to engage in trade, never to make use of 
money— had not these been among the earliest resolutions passed at that first 
triumphant Meeting after Jones was expelled? All the animals remembered 
passing such resolutions: or at least they thought that they remembered it. The 
four young pigs who had protested when Napoleon abolished the Meetings 
raised their voices timidly, but they were promptly silenced by a tremendous 



Animal Farm 


37 


growling from the dogs. Then, as usual, the sheep. broke into ‘Four legs good, 
two legs bad!’ and the momentary awkwardness was smoothed over. Finally 
Napoleon raised his trotter for silence and announced that he had already 
made all the arrangements. There would be no need for any of the animals to 
come in contact with human beings, which would clearly be most undesirable. 
He intended to take the whole burden upon his own shoulders. A Mr 
Whymper, a solicitor hving in Willingdon, had agreed to act as intermediary 
between Animal Farm and the outside world, and would visit the farm every 
Monday morning to receive his instructions. Napoleon ended his speech with 
his usual cry of ‘Long live Animal Farm!’, and after the singing of ‘Beasts of 
England’ the animals were dismissed. 

Afterwards Squealer made a round of the farm and set the animals’ minds at 
rest. He assured them that the resolution against engaging in trade and using 
money had never been passed, or even suggested. It was pure imagination, 
probably traceable in the beginning to lies circulated by Snowball. A few 
animals still felt faintly doubtful, but Squealer asked them shrewdly, ‘Are you 
certain that this is not something that you have dreamed, comrades? Have you 
any record of such a resolution? Is it written down anywhere?’ And since it was 
certainly true that nothing of the kmd existed in writing, the animals were 
satisfied that they had been mistaken. 

Every Monday Mr Whymper visited the farm as had been arranged. He was 
a sly-looking little man with side whiskers, a solicitor in a very small way of 
business, but sharp enough to have realized earlier than anyone else that 
Animal Farm would need a broker and that the commissions would be worth 
having. The animals watched his coming and going with a kind of dread, and 
avoided him as much as possible. Nevertheless, the sight of Napoleon, on all 
fours, delivering orders to Whymper, who stood on two legs, roused their 
pride and partly reconciled them to the new arrangement. Their relations with 
the human race were now not quite the same as they had been before. The 
human beings did not hate Animal Farm any less now that it was prospering; 
indeed, they hated it more than ever. Every human being held it as an article of 
faith that the farm would go bankrupt sooner or later, and, above all, that the 
windmill would be a failure. They would meet in the public-houses and prove 
to one another by means of diagrams that the windmill was bound to fall down, 
or that if it did stand up, then that it would never work. And yet, against their 
will, they had developed a certain respect for the efficiency with which the 
animals were managing their own affairs. One symptom of this was that they 
had begun to call Animal Farm by its proper name and ceased to pretend that it 
was called the Manor Farm. They had also dropped their championship of 
Jones, who had given up hope of getting his farm back and gone to live in 
another part of the country. Except through Whymper, there was as yet no 
contact between Anim al Farm and the outside world, but there were constant 
rumours that Napoleon was about to enter into a definite business agreement 
either with Mr Pilkington of Foxwood or with Mr Frederick of Pinchfield-but 
never, it was noticed, with both simultaneously. 

It was about this time that the pigs suddenly moved into the farmhouse and 



Animal Farm 


3 * 

took up their residence there. Again the animals seemed to remember that a 
resolution against this had been passed in the early days, and again Squealer 
was able to convince- them that this was not the case. It was absolutely 
necessary, he said, that the pigs, who were the brains of the farm, should have a 
quiet place to work in. It was also more suited to the dignity of the Leader (for 
of late he had taken to speaking of Napoleon under the title of ‘Leader’) to live 
in a house than in a mere sty. Nevertheless, some of the animals were disturbed 
when they heard that the pigs not only took their meals in the kitchen and used 
the drawing-room as a recreation room but also slept in the beds. Boxer passed 
it off as usual with ‘Napoleon is always right!’, but Clover, who thought she 
remembered a definite ruling against beds, went to the end of the barn and 
tried to puzzle out the Seven Commandments which were inscribed there. 
Finding herself unable to read more than individual letters, she fetched 
Muriel. 

‘Muriel,’ she said, ‘read me the Fourth Commandment. Does it not say 
something about never sleeping in a bed?’ 

With some difficulty Muriel spelt it out. 

‘It says, “No animaLshall sleep in a bed with sheets she announced finally. 

Curiously enough, Clover had not remembered that the Fourth Command- 
ment mentioned sheets; but as it was there on the wall, it must have done so. 
And Squealer, who happened to be passing at this moment, attended by two or 
three dogs, was able to put the whole matter in its proper perspective. 

‘You have heard then, comrades,’ he said, ‘that we pigs now sleep in the beds 
of the farmhouse? And why not? You did not suppose, surely, that there was 
ever a ruling against beds ? A bed merely means a place to sleep in. A pile of 
straw in a stall is a bed, properly regarded. The rule was against sheets, which 
are a human invention. We have removed the sheets from the farmhouse beds, 
and sleep between blankets. And very comfortable beds they are too! But not 
more comfortable than we need, I can tell you, comrades, with all the 
brainwork we have to do nowadays. You would not rob us of our repose, would 
you, comrades? You would not have us too tired to carry out our duties? Surely 
none of you wishes to see Jones back?’ 

The animals reassured him on this point immediately, and no more was said 
about the pigs sleeping in the farmhouse beds. And when, some days 
afterwards, it was announced that from now on the pigs would get up an hour 
later in the mornings than the other animals, no complaint was made about 
that either. 

By the autumn the animals were tired but happy. They had had a hard year, 
and after the sale of part of the hay and corn, the stores of food for the winter 
were none too plentiful, but the windmill compensated for everything. It was 
almost half built now. After the harvest there was a stretch of clear dry 
weather, and the animals toiled harder than ever, thinking it well worth while 
to plod to and fro all day with blocks of stone if by doing so they could raise the 
walls another foot. Boxer would even come out at nights and work for an hour 
or two on his own by the light of the harvest mux n. In their spare moments the 
animals would walk round and round the half-finished mill, admiring the 



Animal Farm 


39 

strength and perpendicularity of its walls and marvelling that they should ever 
have been able to build anything so imposing. Only old Benjamin refused to 
grow enthusiastic about the windmill, though, as usual, he would utter 
nothing beyond the cryptic remark that donkeys live a long time. 

November came, with raging south-west winds. Building had to stop 
because it was now too wet to mix the cement. Finally there came a night when 
the gale was so violent that the farm buildings rocked on their foundations and 
several tiles were blown off the roqf of the barn. The hens woke up squawking 
with terror because they had all dreamed simultaneously of hearing a gun go 
off in the distance. In the morning the animals came out of their stalls to find 
that the flagstaff had blown down and an elm tree at the foot of the orchard had 
been plucked up like a radish. They had just noticed this when a cry of despair 
broke from every animal’s throat. A terrible sight had met their eyes. The 
windmill was in ruins. 

With one accord they dashed down to the spot. Napoleon, who seldom 
moved out of a walk, raced ahead of them all. Yes, there it lay, the fruit of all 
their struggles, levelled to its foundations, the stones they had broken and 
carried so laboriously scattered all around. Unable at first to speak, they stood 
gazing mournfully at the litter of fallen stone. Napoleon paced to and fro in 
silence, occasionally snuffing at the ground. His tail had grown rigid and 
twitched sharply from side to side, a sign in him of intense mental activity. 
Suddenly he halted as though his mind were made up. 

‘Comrades,’ he said quietly, ‘do you know who is responsible for this? Do 
you know the enemy who has come in the night and overthrown our windmill? 
snowball!’ he suddenly roared in a voice of thunder. ‘Snowball has done this 
thing! In sheer malignity, thinking to set back our plans and avenge himself for 
his ignominious expulsion, this traitor has crept here under cover of night and 
destroyed our work of nearly a year. Comrades, here and now I pronounce the 
death sentence upon Snowball. “Animal Hero, Second Class”, and half a 
bushel of apples to any animal who brings him to justice. A full bushel to 
anyone who captures him alive!’ 

The animals were shocked beyond measure to learn that even Snowball 
could be guilty of such an action. There was a cry of indignation and everyone 
began thinking out ways of catching Snowball if he should ever come back. 
Almost immediately the footprints of a pig were discovered in the grass at a 
little distance from the knoll. They could only be traced for a few yards, but 
appeared to lead to a hole in the hedge. Napoleon snuffed deeply at them and 
pronounced them to be Snowball’s. He gave it .as -his opinion that Snowball 
had probably come from the direction of Foxwood Farm. 

‘No more delays, comrades!’ said Napoleon when the footprints had been 
examined. There is work to be done. This very morning we begin rebuilding 
the windmill, and we will build all through the winter, rain or shine. We will 
teach this miserable traitor that he cannot undo our work so easily. Remember, 
comrades, there must be no alteration in our plans: they shall be carried out 
to the day. Forward, comrades! Long live the windmill! Long live Animal 
Farm!’ 



7 


It was a bitter winter. The stormy weather was followed by sleet and snow, and 
then by a hard frost which did not break till well into February. The animals 
carried on as best as they could with the rebuilding of the windmill, well 
knowing that the outside world was watching them and that the envious 
human beings would rejoice and triumph if the mill were not finished on time. 

Out of spite, the human beings pretended not to believe that it was Snowball 
who had destroyed the windmill: they said that it had fallen down because the 
walls were too thin. The animals knew that this was not the case Still, it had 
been decided to build the walls three feet thick this time instead of eighteen 
inches as before, which meant collecting much larger quantities of stone. For a 
long time the quarry was full of snowdrifts and nothing could be done. Some 
progress was made in the dry frosty weather that followed, but it was cruel 
work, and the animals could not feel so hopeful about it as they had felt before. 
They were always cold, and usually hungry as well. Only Boxer and Clover 
never lost heart. Squealer made excellent speeches on the joy of service and the 
dignity of labour, but the other animals found more inspiration in Boxer’s 
strength and his never-failing cry of T will work harder! 5 

In January food fell short. The corn ration was drastically reduced, and it 
was announced that an extra potato ration would be issued to make up for it. 
Then it was discovered that the greater part of the potato crop had been frosted 
in the clamps, which had not been covered thickly enough. The potatoes had 
become soft and discoloured, and only a few were edible. For days at a time the 
animals had nothing to eat but chaff and mangels. Starvation seemed to stare 
them in the face. 

It was vitally necessary to conceal this fact from the outside world. 
Emboldened by the collapse of the windmill, the human beings were inventing 
fresh lies about Animal Farm. Once again it was being put about that all the 
animals were dying of famine and disease, and that they were continually 
fighting among themselves and had resorted to cannibalism and infanticide. 
Napoleon was well aware of the bad results that might follow if the real facts of 
the food situation were known, and he decided to make use of Mr Whymper to 
spread a contrary impression. Hitherto the animals had had little or no contact 
with Whymper on his weekly visits: now, however, a few selected animals, 
mostly sheep, were instructed to remark casually in his hearing that rations 
had been, increased. In addition, Napoleon ordered the almost empty bins in 
the store-shed to be filled nearly to the brim with sand, which was then covered 



Animal Farm 41 

up with what remained of the grain and meal. On some suitable pretext 
Whymper was led through the store-shed and allowed to catch a glimpse of the 
bins. He was deceived and continued to report to the outside world that there 
was no food shortage on Animal Farm. 

Nevertheless, towards the end of January it became obvious that it would be 
necessary to procure some more grain from somewhere. In these days 
Napoleon rarely appeared in public, but spent all his time in the farmhouse, 
which was guarded at each door by fierce-looking dogs. When he did emerge, 
it was in a ceremonial manner, with an escort of six dogs who closely 
surrounded him and growled if anyone came too near. Frequently he did not 
even appear on Sunday mornings, but issued his orders through one of the 
other pigs, usually Squealer. 

One Sunday morning Squealer announced that the hens, who had just come 
in to lay again, must surrender their eggs. Napoleon had accepted, through 
Whymper, a contract for four hundred eggs a week. The price of these would 
pay for enough grain and meal to keep the farm going till summer came on and 
conditions were easier. 

When the hens heard this, they raised a terrible outcry. They had been 
warned earlier that this sacrifice might be necessary, but had not believed that 
it would really happen. They were just getting their clutches ready for the 
spring sitting, and they protested that to take the eggs away now was murder. 
For the first time since the expulsion of Jones there was something resembling 
a rebellion. Led by three young Black Minorca pullets, the hens made a 
determined effort to thwart Napoleon’s wishes. Their method was to fly up to 
the rafters and there lay their eggs, which smashed to pieces on the floor. 
Napoleon acted swiftly and ruthlessly. He ordered the hen’s rations to be 
stopped, and decreed that any animal giving so much as a grain of corn to a hen 
should be punished by death. The dogs saw to it that these orders were carried 
out. For five days the hens held out, then they capitulated and went back to 
their nesting boxes. Nine hens had died in the meantime. Their bodies were 
buried in the orchard, and it was given out they had died of coccidiosis. 
Whymper heard nothing of this affair, and the eggs were duly delivered, a 
grocer’s van driving up to the farm once a week to take them away. 

All this while no more had been seen of Snowball. He was rumoured to be 
hiding on one of the neighbouring farms, either Foxwood or Pinchfield. 
Napoleon was by this time on slightly better terms with the other farmers than 
before. It happened that there was in the yard a pile of timber which had been 
stacked there ten years earlier when a beech spinney was cleared. It was well 
seasoned, and Whymper had advised Napoleon to sell it; both Mr Pilkington 
and Mr Frederick were anxious to buy it. Napoleon was hesitating between the 
two, unable to make up his mind. It was noticed that whenever he seemed on 
the point of coming to an agreement with Frederick, Snowball was declared to 
be in biding at Foxwood, while, when he inclined towards Pilkington, 
Snowball was said to be at Pinchfield, 

Suddenly, early in the spring, an alarming thing was discovered. Snowball 
was secretly frequenting the farm by night! The animals were so disturbed that 



Animal Farm 


42 

they could hardly sleep in their stalls. Every night, it was said, he came 
creeping in under cover of darkness and performed all kinds of mischief. He 
stole the corn, he upset the milk-pails, he broke the eggs, he trampled the seed- 
beds, he gnawed the bark off the fruit trees. Whenever anything went wrong it 
became usual to attribute it to Snowball. If a window was broken or a drain 
blocked up, someone was certain to say that Snowball had come in the night 
and done it, and when the key of the store-shed was lost, the whole farm was 
convinced that Snowball had thrown it down the well Curiously enough, they 
went on believing this even after the mislaid key was found under a sack of 
meal. The cows declared unanimously that Snowball crept into their stalls and 
milked them m their sleep. The rats, which had been troublesome that winter, 
were also said to be in league with Snowball. 

Napoleon decreed that there should be a full investigation into Snowball’s 
activities. With his dogs in attendance he set out and made a careful tour of 
inspection of the farm buildings, the other animals following at a respectful 
distance. At every few steps Napoleon stopped and snuffed the ground for 
traces of Snowball’s footsteps, which, he said, he could detect by the smell. He 
snuffed in every corner, in the barn, in the cowshed, in the hen-houses, in the 
vegetable garden, and found traces of Snowball almost everywhere He would 
put his snout to the ground, give several deep sniffs, and exclaim in a terrible 
voice, ‘Snowball! He has been here! I can smell him distinctly!’ and at the word 
‘Snowball’ all the dogs let out blood-curdling growls and showed their side 
teeth. 

The animals were thoroughly frightened. It seemed to them as though 
Snowball were some kind of invisible influence, pervading the air about them 
and menacing them with all kinds of dangers. In the evening Squealer called 
them together, and with an alarmed expression on his face told them that he 
had some serious news to report. 

‘Comrades!’ cried Squealer, making little nervous skips, ‘a most terrible 
thing has been discovered. Snowball has sold himself to Frederick of 
Pinchfield Farm, who is even now plotting to attack us and take our farm away 
from us! Snowball is to act as his guide when the attack begins. But there is 
worse than that. We had thought that Snowball’s rebellion was caused by his 
vanity and ambition. But we .were wrong, comrades. Do you know what the 
real reason was? Snowball was in league with Jones from the very start! He was 
Jones’s secret agent all the time. It has all been proved by documents which he 
left behind him and which we have only just discovered. To my mind this 
explains a great deal, comrades. Did we not see for ourselves how he 
attempted— fortunately without success-to get us defeated and destroyed at 
the Battle of the Cowshed?’ 

The animals were stupefied. This was a wickedness far outdoing Snowball’s 
destruction of the windmill. But it was some minutes before they could fully 
1 take it in. They all remembered, or thought they remembered, how they had 
seen . Snowball charging ahead of them in the Battle of the Cowshed, how he 
had rallied and encouraged them at every turn, and how he had not paused for 
an instant even when the pellets from Jones’s gun had wounded his back. At 



Animal Farm 


43 

first it was a little difficult to see how this fitted in with his being on Jones’s 
side. Even Boxer, who seldom asked questions, was puzzled. He lay down, 
tucked his forehoofs beneath him, shut his eyes, and with a hard effort 
managed to formulate his thoughts. 

‘I do not believe that,’ he said. ‘Snowball fought bravely at the Battle of the 
Cowshed. I saw him myself. Did we not give him “Animal Hero, First Class”, 
immediately afterwards?’ 

‘That was our mistake, comrade. For we know now-it is all written down in 
the secret documents that we have found-that in reality he was trying to lure 
us to our doom.’ 

‘But he was wounded,’ said Boxer. ‘We all saw him running with blood.’ 

‘That was part of the arrangement!’ cried Squealer. ‘Jones’s shot only 
grazed him. I could show you this in his own writing, if you were able to read 
it. The plot was for Snowball, at the critical moment, to give the signal for 
flight and leave the field to the enemy. And he very nearly succeeded- 1 will 
even say, comrades, he would have succeeded if it had not been for our heroic 
Leader, Comrade Napoleon. Do you not remember how, just at the moment 
when Jones and his men had got inside the yard, Snowball suddenly turned 
and fled, and many animals followed him? And do you not remember, too, that 
it was just at that moment, when panic was spreading and all seemed lost, that 
Comrade Napoleon sprang foward with a cry of “Death to Humanity!” and 
sank his teeth in Jones’s leg? Surely you remember that , comrades?’ exclaimed 
Squealer, frisking from side to side. 

Now when Squealer described the scene so graphically, it seemed to the 
animals that they did remember it. At any rate, they remembered that at the 
critical moment of the battle Snowball had turned to flee. But Boxer was still a 
little uneasy. 

‘I do not believe that Snowball was a traitor at the beginning,’ he said finally. 
‘What he has done since is different. But I believe that at the Battle of the 
Cowshed he was a good comrade.’ 

‘Our Leader, Comrade Napoleon,’ announced Squealer, speaking very 
slowly and firmly, ‘has stated categorically-categorically, comrade-that 
Snowball was Jones’s agent from the very beginning-yes, and from long 
before the Rebellion was ever thought of.’ 

‘Ah, that is different!’ said Boxer. Tf Comrade Napoleon says it, it must be 
right.’ 

‘That is the true spirit, comrade!’ cried Squealer, but it was noticed he cast a 
very ugly look at Boxer with his little twinkling eyes. He turned to go, then 
paused and added impressively: ‘I warn every animal on this farm to keep his 
eyes very wide open. For we have reason to think that some of Snowball’s 
secret agents are lurking among us at this moment!’ 

Four days later, in the late afternoon, Napoleon ordered all the animals to 
assemble hi the yard. When they were all gathered together, Napoleon 
emerged from the farmhouse, wearing both his medals (for he had recently 
awarded himself ‘Animal Hero, First Class’, and ‘Animal Hero, Second 
Class’), with MS nine huge dogs frisking round him and uttering growls that 



Animal Farm 


44 

sent shivers down all the animals’ spines. They all cowered silently in their 
places, seeming to know in advance that some terrible thing was about to 
happen. 

Napoleon stood sternly surveying his audience; then he uttered a high- 
pitched whimper. Immediately the dogs bounded forward, seized four of the 
pigs by the ear and dragged them, squealing with pain and terror, to 
Napoleon’s feet. The pigs’ ears were bleeding, the dogs had tasted blood, and 
for a few moments they appeared to go quite mad. To the amazement of 
everybody, three of them flung themselves upon Boxer. Boxer saw them 
coming and put out his great hoof, caught a dog in mid-air, and pinned him to 
the ground. The dog shrieked for mercy and the other two fled with their tails 
between their legs. Boxer looked at Napoleon to know whether he should 
crush the dog to death or let it go. Napoleon appeared to change countenance, 
and sharply ordered Boxer to let the dog go, whereat Boxer lifted his hoof, and 
the dog slunk away, bruised and howling. 

Presently the tumult died down. The four pigs waited, trembling, with guilt 
written on every line of their countenances. Napoleon now called upon them to 
confess their crimes. They were the same four pigs as had protested when 
Napoleon abolished the Sunday Meetings. Without any further prompting 
they confessed that they had been secretly in touch with Snowball ever since 
his expulsion, that they had collaborated with him in destroying the windmill, 
and that they had entered into an agreement with him to hand over Animal 
Farm to Mr Frederick. They added that Snowball had privately admitted to 
them that he had been Jones’s secret agent for years past. When they had 
finished their confession, the dogs promptly tore their throats out, and in a 
terrible voice Napoleon demanded whether any other animal had anything to 
confess. 

The three hens who had been the ringleaders in the attempted rebellion over 
the eggs now came forward and stated that Snowball had appeared to them in a 
dream and incited them to disobey Napoleon’s orders. They, too, were 
slaughtered. Then a goose came forward and confessed to having secreted six 
ears of corn during the last year’s harvest and eaten them in the night. Then a 
sheep confessed to having urinated in the drinking pool -urged to do this, so 
she said, by Snowball-and two other sheep confessed to having murdered an 
old ram, an especially devoted follower of Napoleon, by chasing him round the 
bonfire when he was suffering from a cough. They were all slain on the spot. 
And so the tale of confessions and executions went on, until there was a pile of 
corpses lying before Napoleon’s feet and the air was heavy with the smell of 
blood, which had been unknown there since the expulsion of Jones. 

When it was all over, the remaining animals, except for the pigs and dogs, 
crept away in a body. They were shaken and miserable. They did not know 
which was more shocking-the treachery of the animals who had leagued 
themselves with Snowball, or the cruel retribution they had just witnessed. In 
the old days there had often been scenes of bloodshed equally terrible, but it 
seemed to all of them that it was far worse now that it was happening among 
themselves. Since Jones had left the farm, until today, no animal had killed 



Animal Farm 


45 

another animal. Not even a rat had been killed. They had made their way on to 
the little knoll where the half-finished windmill stood, and with one accord 
they all lay down as though huddling together for warmth-Clover, Muriel, 
Benjamin, the cows, the sheep, and a whole flock of geese and hens-everyone, 
indeed, except the cat, who had suddenly disappeared just before Napoleon 
ordered the animals to assemble. For some time nobody spoke. Only Boxer 
remained on his feet. He fidgeted to and fro, swishing his long black tail against 
his sides, and occasionally uttering a little whinny of surprise. Finally he said: 

£ I do not understand it. I would not have believed that such things could 
happen on our farm. It must be due to some fault in ourselves. The solution, as 
I see it, is to work harder. From now onwards I shall get up a full hour earlier 
in the mornings. 5 

And he moved off at his lumbering trot and made for the quarry. Having got 
there, he collected two successive loads of stone and dragged them down to the 
windmill before retiring for the night. 

The animals huddled about Clover, not speaking. The knoll where they 
were lying gave them a wide prospect across the countryside. Most of Animal 
Farm was within their view-the long pasture stretching down to the main 
road, the hayfield, the spinney, the drinking pool, the ploughed fields where 
the young wheat was thick and green, and the red roofs of the farm buildings 
with the smoke curling from the chimneys. It was a clear spring evening. The 
grass and the bursting hedges were gilded by the level rays of the sun. Never 
had the farm-and with a kind of surprise they remembered that it was their 
own farm, every inch of it their own property-appeared to the animals so 
desirable a place. As Clover looked down the hillside her eyes filled with tears. 
If she could have spoken her thoughts, it would have been to say that this was 
not what they had aimed at when they had set themselves years ago to work for 
the overthrow of the human race. These scenes of terror and slaughter were 
not what they had looked forward to on that night when old Major first stirred 
them to rebellion. If she herself had had any picture of the future, it had been 
of a society of animals set free from hunger and the whip, all equal, each 
working according to his capacity, the strong protecting the weak, as she had 
protected the last brood of ducklings with her foreleg on the night of Major’s 
speech. Instead-she did not know why-they had come to a time when no one 
dared speak his mind, when fierce, growling dogs roamed everywhere, and 
when you had to watch your comrades torn to pieces after confessing to 
shocking crimes. There was no thought of rebellion or disobedience in her 
mind. She knew that, even as things were, they were far better off than they 
had been in the days of Jones, and that before all else it was needful to prevent 
the return of the human beings. Whatever happened she would remain 
faithful, work hard, carry out the orders that were given to her, and accept the 
leadership of Napoleon. But still, it was not for this that she and all the other 
animals had hoped and toiled. It was not for this that they had built the 
windmill and faced the bullets of Jones’s guns. Such were her thoughts, 
though she lacked the words to express them. 

At last, feeling this to be in some way a substitute for the words she was 



Animal Farm 


46 

unable to find, she began to sing ‘Beasts of England’. The other animals sitting 
round her took it up, and they sang it three times over-very tunefully, but 
slowly and mournfully, in a way they had never sung it before. 

They had just finished singing it for the third time when Squealer, attended 
by two dogs, approached them with the air of having something important to 
say. He announced that, by a special decree of Comrade Napoleon, ‘Beasts of 
England’ had been abolished. From now onwards it was forbidden to sing it. 

The animals were taken aback. 

‘Why?’ cried Muriel. 

‘It is no longer needed, comrade,’ said Squealer stiffly. “‘Beasts of England” 
was the song of the Rebellion. But the Rebellion is now completed. The 
execution of the traitors this afternoon was the final act. The enemy both 
external and internal has been defeated. In “Beasts of England” we expressed 
our longing for a better society in days to come. But that society has now been 
established. Clearly this song has no longer any purpose.’ 

Frightened though they were, some of the animals might possibly have 
protested, but at this moment the sheep set up their usual bleating of ‘Four 
legs good, two legs bad’, which went on for several minutes and put an end to 
the discussion. 

So ‘Beasts of England’ was heard no more. In its place Minimus, the poet, 
had composed another song which began: 

Animal Farm, Animal Farm, 

Never through me shalt thou come to harm* 

and this was sung every Sunday morning after the hoisting of the flag. But 
somehow neither the words nor the tune ever seemed to the animals to come up 
to ‘Beasts of England’. 


8 


A few days later, when the terror caused by the executions had died down, 
some of the animals remembered-or thought they remembered-that the Sixth 
Commandment decreed: ‘No animal shall kill any other animal.’ And though 
no one cared to mention it in the hearing of the pigs or the dogs, it was felt that 
the killings which had taken place did not square with this. Clover asked 
Benjamin to read her the Sixth Commandment, and when Benjamin, as usual, 
said that he refused to meddle in such matters, she fetched Muriel. Muriel read 
the Commandment for her. It ran: ‘No animal shall kill any other animal 
without cause . 7 Somehow or other, the last two words had slipped out of the 
animals’ memory. But they saw now that the commandment had not been 
violated; for clearly there was good reason for killing the traitors who had 



Animal Farm 


47 


leagued themselves with Snowball. 

Throughout that year the animals worked even harder than they had worked 
in the previous year. To rebuild the windmill, with walls twice as thick as 
before, and to finish it by the appointed date, together with the regular work of 
the farm, was a tremendous labour. There were times when it seemed to the 
animals that they worked longer hours and fed no better than they had done in 
Jones’s day. On Sunday mornings Squealer, holding down a long strip of 
paper with his trotter, would read out to them lists of figures proving that the 
production of every class of foodstuff had increased by 200 per cent, 300 per 
cent, or 500 per cent, as the case might be. The animals saw no reason to 
disbelieve him, especially as they could no longer remember very clearly what 
conditions had been like before the Rebellion. All the same, there were days 
when they felt that they would sooner have had less figures and more food. 

All orders were now issued through Squealer or one of the other pigs. 
Napoleon himself was not seen in public as often as once a fortnight. When he 
did appear, he was attended not only by his retinue of dogs but by a black 
cockerel who marched in front of him and acted as a kind of trumpeter, letting 
out a loud ‘cock-a-doodle-doo’ before Napoleon spoke. Even in the 
farmhouse, it was said, Napoleon inhabited separate apartments from the 
others. He took his meals alone, with two dogs to wait upon him, and always 
ate from the Crown Derby dinner service which had been in the glass 
cupboard in the drawing-room. It was also announced that the gun would be 
fired every year on Napoleon’s birthday, as well as on the other two 
anniversaries. 

Napoleon was now never spoken of simply as ‘Napoleon’. He was always 
referred to in formal style as ‘our Leader, Comrade Napoleon’, and the pigs 
liked to invent for him such titles as Father of All Animals, Terror of 
Mankind, Protector of the Sheep-fold, Ducklings’ Friend, and the like. In his 
speeches, Squealer would talk with the tears rolling down his cheeks of 
Napoleon’s wisdom, the goodness of his heart, and the deep love he bore to all 
animals everywhere, even and especially the unhappy animals who still lived in 
ignorance and slavery on other farms. It had become usual to give Napoleon 
the credit for every successful achievement and every stroke of good fortune. 
You would often hear one hen remark to another. ‘Under the guidance of our 
Leader, Comrade Napoleon, I have laid five eggs in six days’; or two cows, 
enjoying a drink at the pool, would exclaim, ‘Thanks to the leadership of 
Comrade Napoleon, how excellent this water tastes!’ The general feeling on 
the farm was well expressed in a poem entitled ‘Comrade Napoleon’, which 
was composed by Minimus and which ran as follows: 

Friend of the fatherless! 

Fountain of happiness! 

Lord of the s will-bucket! Oh, how my soul is on 
Fite when I gaae at thy 
Calm and commanding eye, 

Like the sun in the sky, 

Comrade Napoleon! 


4.8 Animal Farm 

Thou art the giver of 
All that thy creatures love, 

Full belly twice a day, clean straw to roll upon, 

Every beast great or small 
Sleeps at peace in his stall, 

Thou watchest over all. 

Comrade Napoleon! 

Had I a sucking-pig, 

Ere he had grown as big 

Even as a pint bottle or a rolling-pm, 

He should have learned to be 
Faithful and true to thee, 

Yes, his first squeak should be 
‘Comrade Napoleon!’ 

Napoleon approved of this poem and caused it to be inscribed on the wall of 
the big barn, at the opposite end from the Seven Commandments. It was 
surmounted by a portrait of Napoleon, in profile, executed by Squealer in 
white paint. 

Meanwhile, through the agency of Whymper, Napoleon was engaged in 
complicated negotiations with Frederick and Pilkington. The pile of timber 
was still unsold. Of the two, Frederick was the more anxious to get hold of it, 
but he would not offer a reasonable price. At the same time there were renewed 
rumours that Frederick and his men were plotting to attack Animal Farm and 
to destroy the windmill, the building of which had aroused furious jealousy in 
him. Snowball was known to be still skulking on Pinchfield Farm. In the 
middle of the summer the animals were alarmed to hear that three hens had 
come forward and confessed that, inspired by Snowball, they had entered into 
a plot to murder Napoleon. They were executed immediately, and fresh 
precautions for Napoleon’s safety were taken. Four dogs guarded his bed at 
night, one at each corner, and a young pig named Pinkeye was given the task of 
tasting all his food before he ate it, lest it should be poisoned. 

At about the same time it was given out that Napoleon had arranged to sell 
the pile of timber to Mr Pilkington^ he was also going to enter into a regular 
agreement for the exchange of certain products between Animal Farm and 
Foxwood. The relations between Napoleon and Pilkington, though they were 
only conducted through Whymper, were now almost friendly. The animals 
distrusted Pilkington, as a human being, but greatly preferred him to 
Frederick, whom they both feared and hated. As the summer wore on, and the 
windmiR neared completion, the rumours of an impending treacherous attack 
grew stronger and stronger. Frederick, it was said, intended to bring against 
them twenty men all armed with guns, and he had already bribed the 
magistrates and police, so that if he could once get hold of the title-deeds of 
Animal Farm they would ask no questions. Moreover, terrible stories were 
leaking out from Pinchfield about the cruelties that Frederick practised upon 
his animals. He had flogged an old horse to death, he starved his cows, he had 
killed a dog by throwing it into a furnace, he amused himself in the evenings by 
making cocks fight with splinters of razor-blade tied to their spurs. The 
animals’ blood boiled with rage when-they heard of these things being done to 



Animal Farm 


49 

their comrades, and sometimes they clamoured to be allowed to go out in a 
body and attack Pinchfield Farm, drive out the humans, and set the animals 
free. But Squealer counselled them to avoid rash actions and trust in Comrade 
Napoleon’s strategy. 

Nevertheless, feeling against Frederick continued to run high. One Sunday 
morning Napoleon appeared in the barn and explained that he had never at any 
time contemplated selling the pile of timber to Frederick; he considered it 
beneath his dignity, he said, to have dealings with scoundrels of that 
description The pigeons who were still sent out to spread tidings of the 
Rebellion were forbidden to set foot anywhere on Foxwood, and were also 
ordered to drop their former slogan of ‘Death to Humanity’ in favour of 
‘Death to Frederick’. In the late summer yet another of Snowball’s 
machinations was laid bare. The wheat crop was full of weeds, and it was 
discovered that on one of his nocturnal visits Snowball had mixed weed seeds 
with the seed corn. A gander who had been privy to the plot had confessed his 
guilt to Squealer and immediately committed suicide by swallowing deadly 
nightshade berries. The animals now also learned that Snowball had never-as 
many of them had believed hitherto-received the order of ‘Animal Hero, First 
Class’. This was merely a legend which had been spread some time after the 
Battle of the Cowshed by Snowball himself. So far from being decorated, he 
had been censured for showing cowardice in the battle. Once again some of the 
animals heard this with a certain bewilderment, but Squealer was soon able to 
convince them that their memories had been at fault. 

In the autumn, by a tremendous, exhausting effort-for the harvest had to be 
gathered at almost the same time-the windmill was finished. The machinery 
had still to be installed, and Whymper was negotiating the purchase of it, but 
the structure was completed. In the teeth of every difficulty, in spite of 
inexperience, of primitive implements, of bad luck, and of Snowball’s 
treachery, the work had been finished punctually to the very day! Tired out 
but proud, the animals walked round and round their masterpiece, which 
appeared even more beautiful in their eyes than when it had been built the first 
time. Moreover, the walls were twice as thick as before. Nothing short of 
explosives would lay them low this time! And when they thought of how they 
had laboured, what discouragements they had overcome, and the enormous 
difference that would be made in their lives when the sails were turning and the 
dynamos running-when they thought of all this, their tiredness forsook them 
and they gambolled round and round the windmill, uttering cries of triumph. 
Napoleon himself, attended by his dogs and his cockerel, came down to inspect 
the completed work; he personally congratulated the animals on their 
achievement, and announced that the mill would be, named Napoleon Mill. 

Two days later the animals were called together for a special meeting in the 
bam. They were struck dumb with surprise when Napoleon announced that 
he had sold the pile of timber to Frederick, Tomorrow Frederick’s wagons 
would arrive and begin carting it away. Throughout the whole period of his 
seeming friendship with Pilkington, Napoleon had really been in secret 
agreement with Frederick. 



SO 


Animal Farm 


All relations with Foxwood had been broken off; insulting messages had 
been sent to Pilkington. The pigeons had been told to avoid Pinchfield Farm 
and to alter their slogan from ‘Death to Frederick 5 to ‘Death to Pilkington 5 . At 
the same time Napoleon assured the animals that the stories of an impending 
attack on Animal Farm were completely untrue, and that the tales about 
Frederick’s cruelty to his animals had been greatly exaggerated. All these 
rumours had probably originated with Snowball and his agents. It now 
appeared that Snowball was not, after all, hiding on Pinchfield Farm, and in 
fact had never been there in his life: he was living-in considerable luxury, so it 
was said -at Foxwood, and had in reality been a pensioner of Pilkington for 
years past. 

The pigs were in ecstasies over Napoleon’s cunning. By seeming to be 
friendly with Pilkington he had forced Frederick to raise his price by twelve 
pounds. But the superior quality of Napoleon’s mind, said Squealer, was 
shown in the fact that he trusted nobody, not even Frederick. Frederick had 
wanted to pay for the timber with something called a cheque, which, it seemed, 
was a piece of paper with a promise to pay written upon it. But Napoleon was 
too clever for him. He had demanded payment in real five-pound notes, which 
were to be handed over before the timber was removed. Already Frederick had 
paid up; and the sum he had paid was just enough to buy the machinery for the 
windmill. 

Meanwhile the timber was being carted away at high speed. When it was all 
gone, another special meeting was held in the barn for the animals to inspect 
Frederick’s bank-notes. Smiling beatifically, and wearing both his de- 
corations, Napoleon reposed on a bed of straw on the platform, with the money 
at his side neatly piled on a china dish from the farmhouse kitchen. The 
animals filed slowly past, and each gazed his fill. And Boxer put out his nose to 
sniff at the bank-notes, and the flimsy white things stirred and rustled in his 
breath. 

Three days later there was a terrible hullabaloo. Whymper, his face deadly 
pale, came racing up the path on his bicycle, flung it down in the yard, and 
rushed straight into the farmhouse. The next moment a choking roar of rage 
sounded from Napoleon’s apartments. The news of what had happened sped 
round the farm like wildfire. The bank-notes were forgeries! Frederick had got 
the timber for nothing! 

Napoleon called the animals together immediately and in a terrible voice 
pronounced the death sentence upon Frederick. When captured, he said, 
Frederick should be boiled alive. At the same time he warned them that after 
this treacherous deed the worst was to be expected. Frederick and his men 
might make their long-expected attack at any moment. Sentinels were placed 
at all the approaches to the farm. In addition, four pigeons were sent - to 
Foxwood with a conciliatory message, which it was hoped might re-establish 
good relations with Pilkington. 

The very next morning the attack came. The animals were at breakfast when 
the look-outs came racing in with the news that Frederick and his followers 
had already come through the five-barred gate. Boldly enough the animals 



Animal Farm 


5i 

sallied forth to meet them, but this time they did not have the easy victory that 
they had had in the Battle of the Cowshed. There were fifteen men, with half a 
dozen guns between them, and they opened fire as soon as they got within fifty 
yards. The animals could not face the terrible explosions and the stinging 
pellets, and in spite of the efforts of Napoleon and Boxer to rally them, they 
were soon driven back. A number of them were already wounded. They took 
refuge in the farm buildings and peeped cautiously out from chinks and knot- 
holes. The whole of the big pasture, including the windmill, was in the hands 
of the enemy. For the moment even Napoleon seemed at a loss. He paced up 
and down without a word, his tail rigid and twitching. Wistful glances were 
sent in the direction of Fox wood. If Pilkmgton and his men would help them, 
the day might yet be won. But at this moment the four pigeons, who had been 
sent out on the day before, returned, one of them bearing a scrap of paper from 
Pilkington. On it was pencilled the words: ‘Serves you right’. 

Meanwhile Frederick and his men had halted about the windmill. The 
animals watched them, and a murmur of dismay went round. Two of the men 
had produced a crowbar and a sledge-hammer. They were going to knock the 
windmill down. 

‘Impossible!’ cried Napoleon. ‘We have built the walls far too thick for that. 
They could not knock it down in a week. Courage, comrades!’ 

But Benjamin was watching the movements of the men intently. The two 
with the hammer and the crowbar were drilling a hole near the base of the 
windmill. Slowly, and with an air almost of amusement, Benjamin nodded his 
long muzzle. 

‘I thought so,’ he said. ‘Do you not see what they are doing? In another 
moment they are going to pack blasting powder into that hole.’ 

T errified,"the animals waited. It was impossible now to venture out of the 
shelter of the buildings. After a few minutes the men were seen to be running 
in all directions. Then there was a deafening roar. The pigeons swirled into the 
air, and all the animals, except Napoleon, flung themselves flat on their bellies 
and hid their faces. When they got up again, a huge cloud of black smoke was 
hanging where the windmill had been. Slowly the breeze drifted it away. The 
windmill had ceased to exist! 

At this sight the animals’ courage returned to them. The fear and despair 
they had felt a moment earlier were drowned in their rage against this vile, 
contemptible act. A mighty cry for vengeance went up, and without waiting for 
further orders they charged forth in a body and made straight for the enemy. 
This time they did not heed the cruel pellets that swept over them like hail. It 
was a savage, bitter battle. The men fired again and again, and when the 
animals got to close quarters, lashed out with their sticks and their heavy boots. 
A cow, three sheep, and two geese were killed, and nearly everyone was 
wounded. Even Napoleon, who was directing operations from the rear, had the 
tip of his tail chipped by a pellet. But the men did not go unscathed either. 
Three of them had their heads broken by blows from Boxer’s hoofs, another 
was gored in the belly by a cow’s horn; another had his trousers nearly tom off 
by Jessi^asd Bluebell. And when the nine dogs of Napoleon’s ^jsmJbodjiguard, 



Animal Farm 


52 

whom he had instructed to make a detour under cover of the hedge, suddenly- 
appeared on the men’s flank, baying ferociously, panic overtook them. They 
saw that they were in danger of being surrounded. Frederick shouted to his 
men to get out while the going was good, and the next moment the cowardly 
enemy was running for dear life. The animals chased them right down to the 
bottom of the field, and got in some last kicks at them as they forced their way 
through the thorn hedge. 

They had won, but they were weary and bleeding. Slowly they began to limp 
back towards the farm. The sight of their dead comrades stretched upon the 
grass moved some of them to tears. And for a little while they halted in 
sorrowful silence at the place where the windmill had once stood. Yes, it was 
gone; almost the last trace of their labour was gone! Even the foundations were 
partially destroyed. And in rebuilding it they could not this time, as before, 
make use of the fallen stones. This time the stones had vanished too. The force 
of the explosion had flung them to distances of hundreds of yards. It was as 
though the windmill had never been. 

As they approached the farm Squealer, who had unaccountably been absent 
during the fighting, came skipping towards them, whisking his tail and 
beaming with satisfaction. And the animals heard, from the direction of the 
farm buildings, the solemn booming of a gun. 

‘What is that gun firing for?’ said Boxer. 

‘To celebrate our victory!’ cried Squealer. 

‘What victory?’ said Boxer. His knees were bleeding, he had lost a shoe and 
split his hoof, and a dozen pellets had lodged themselves in his hindleg. 

‘What victory, comrade? Have we not driven the enemy off our soil-the 
sacred soil of Animal Farm?’ 

‘But they have destroyed the windmill. And we had worked on it for two 
years!’ 

‘What matter? We will build another windmill. We will build six windmills 
if we feel like it. You do not appreciate, comrade, the mighty thing that we have 
done. The enemy was in occupation of this very ground that we stand upon. 
And now-thanks to the leadership of Comrade Napoleon- we have won every 
inch of it back again!’ 

‘Then we have won back what we had before,’ said Boxer. 

‘That is our victory,’ said Squealer. 

They limped into the yard. The pellets under the skin of Boxer’s leg smarted 
painfully. He saw ahead of him the heavy labour of rebuilding the windmill 
from the foundations, and already in imagination he braced himself for the 
task. But for the first time it occurred to him that he was eleven years old and 
that perhaps his great muscles were not quite what they had once been. 

But when the animals saw the green flag flying, and heard the gun firing 
again— seven times it was fired in all— and heard the speech that Napoleon 
made, congratulating them on their conduct, it did seem to them after all that 
they had won a great victory. The animals slain in the battle were given a 
solemn funeral. Boxer and Clover pulled the wagon which served as a hearse, 
and Napoleon himself walked at the head of the procession. Two whole days 



Animal Farm 


53 

were given over to celebrations. There were songs, speeches, and more firing 
of the gun, and a special gift of an apple was bestowed on every animal, with 
two ounces of corn for each bird and three biscuits for each dog. It was 
announced that the battle would be called the Battle of the Windmill, and that 
Napoleon had created a new decoration, the Order of the Green Banner, which 
he had conferred upon himself. In the general rejoicings the unfortunate affair 
of the bank-notes was forgotten. 

It was a few days later than this that the pigs came upon a case of whisky in 
the cellars of the farmhouse. It had been overlooked at the time when the house 
was first occupied. That night there came from the farmhouse the sound of 
loud singing, in which, to everyone’s surprise, the strains of ‘Beasts of 
England’ were mixed up. At about half past nine Napoleon, wearing an old 
bowler hat of Mr Jones’s, was distinctly seen to emerge from the back door, 
gallop rapidly round the yard, and disappear indoors again. But in the morning 
a deep silence hung over the farmhouse. Not a pig appeared to be stirring. It 
was nearly nine o’clock when Squealer made his appearance, walking slowly 
and dejectedly, his eyes dull, his tail hanging limply behind him, and with 
every appearance of being seriously ill. He called the animals together and told 
them that he had a terrible piece of news to impart. Comrade Napoleon was 
dying! 

A cry of lamentation went up. Straw was laid down outside the doors of the 
farmhouse, and the animals walked on tiptoe. With tears in their eyes they 
asked one another what they should do if their Leader was taken away from 
them. A rumour went round that Snowball had after all contrived to introduce 
poison into Napoleon’s food. At eleven o’clock Squealer came out to make 
another announcement. As his last act upon earth. Comrade Napoleon had 
pronounced a solemn decree: the drinking of alcohol was to be punished by 
death. 

By the evening, however, Napoleon appeared to be somewhat better, and 
the following morning Squealer was able to tell them that he was well on the 
way to recovery. By the evening of that day Napoleon was back at work, and on 
the next day it was learned that he had instructed Whymper to purchase in 
Willingdon some booklets on brewing and distilling. A week later Napoleon 
gave orders that the small paddock beyond the orchard, which it had 
previously been intended to set aside as a grazing-ground for animals who 
were past work, was to be ploughed up. It was given out that the pasture was 
exhausted and needed re-seeding; but it soon became known that Napoleon 
intended to sow it with barley. 

About this time there occurred a strange incident which hardly anyone was 
able to understand. One night at about twelve o’clock there was a loud crash in 
the yard, and the animals rushed out of their stalls. It was a moonlight night. 
At the foot of the end wall of the big bam, where the Seven Commandments 
were written, there lay a ladder broken in two pieces. Squealer, temporarily 
stunned, was sprawling beside it, and near at hand there lay a lantern, a paint- 
brush, and an overturned pot of white paint. The dogs immediately made a 
ring round Squealer, and escorted him back to the farmhouse as soon as be was 



Animal Farm 


54 

able to walk. None of the animals could form any idea as to what this meant, 
except old Benjamin, who nodded his muzzle with a knowing air, and seemed 
to understand, but would say nothing. 

But a few days later Muriel, reading over the Seven Commandments to 
herself, noticed that there was yet another of them which the animals had 
remembered wrong. They had thought that the Fifth Commandment was ‘No 
animals shall drink alcohol’, but there were two words that they had forgotten. 
Actually the Commandment read: ‘No animal shall drink alcohol to excess . 3 


9 


Boxer’s split hoof was a long time in healing. They had started the rebuilding 
of the windmill the day after the victory celebrations were ended. Boxer 
refused to take even a day off work, and made it a point of honour not to let it be 
seen that he was in pain. In the evening he would admit privately to Clover that 
the hoof troubled him a great deal. Clover treated the hoof with poultices of 
herbs which she prepared by chewing them, and both she and Benjamin urged 
Boxer to work less hard. ‘A horse’s lungs do not last for ever,’ she said to him. 
But Boxer would not listen. He had, he said, only one real ambition left-to see 
the windmill well under way before he reached the age for retirement. 

At the beginning, when the laws of Animal Farm were first formulated, the 
retiring age had been fixed for horses and pigs at twelve, for cows at fourteen, 
for dogs at nine, for sheep at seven, and for hens and geese at five. Liberal old 
age pensions had been agreed upon, As yet no animal had actually retired on 
pension, but of late the subject had been discussed more and more. Now that 
the small field beyond the orchard had been set aside for barley, it was 
rumoured that a corner of the large pasture was to be fenced off and turned into 
a grazing-ground for superannuated animals. For a horse, it was said, the 
pension would be five pounds of corn a day and, in winter, fifteen pounds of 
hay, with a carrot or possibly an apple on public holidays. Boxer’s twelfth 
birthday was due in the late summer of the following year. 

Meanwhile life was hard. The winter was as cold as the last one had been, 
and food was even shorter. Once again all rations were reduced, except those of 
the pigs and dogs. A too rigid equality in rations. Squealer explained, would 
have been contrary to the principles of Animalism. In any case he had no 
' difficulty in proving to the other animals that they were not in reality short of 
food, whatever the appearances might be. For the time being, certainly, it had 
been found necessary to make a readjustment of rations (Squealer always 
spoke of it as a ‘readjustment’, never as a ‘reduction’), but in comparison with 
die days of Jones, the improvement was enormous, Reading out the figures in a 
shrill, rapid voice, he proved to them in detail that they had more oats, more 



Animal Farm 


55 

hay, more turnips than they had had in Jones's day, that they worked shorter 
hours, that their drinking water was of better quality, that they lived longer, 
that a larger proportion of their young ones survived infancy, and that they had 
more straw in their stalls and suffered less from fleas. The animals believed 
every word of it. Truth to tell, Jones and all he stood for had almost faded out 
of their memories. They knew that life nowadays was harsh and bare, that they 
were often hungry and often cold, and that they were usually working when 
they were not asleep. But doubtless it had been worse in the old days. They 
were glad to believe so. Besides, in those days they had been slaves and now 
they were free, and that made all the difference, as Squealer did not fail to point 
out. 

There were many more mouths to feed now In the autumn the four sows 
had all littered about simultaneously, producing thirty-one young pigs 
between them. The young pigs were piebald, and as Napoleon was the only 
boar on the farm, it was possible to guess at their parentage. It was announced 
that later, when bricks and timber had been purchased, a schoolroom would be 
built in the farmhouse garden. For the time being, the young pigs were given 
their instruction by Napoleon himself in the farmhouse kitchen. They took 
their exercise in the garden, and were discouraged from playing with the other 
young animals. About this time, too, it was laid down as a rule that when a pig 
and any other animal met on the path, the other animal must stand aside: and 
also that all pigs, of whatever degree, were to have the privilege of wearing 
green ribbons on their tails on Sundays. 

The farm had had a fairly successful year, but was still short of money. 
There were the bricks, sand, and lime for the schoolroom to be purchased, and 
it would also be necessary to begin saving up again for the machinery for the 
windmill. Then there were lamp oil and candles for the house, sugar for 
Napoleon’s own table (he forbade this to the other pigs, on the ground that it 
made them fat), and all the usual replacements such as tools, nails, string, coal, 
wire, scrap-iron, and dog biscuits. A stump of hay and part of the potato crop 
were sold off, and the contract for eggs was increased to six hundred a week, so 
that that year the hens barely hatched enough chicks to keep their numbers at 
the same level. Rations, reduced in December, were reduced again in 
February, and lanterns in the stalls were forbidden, to save oil. But the pigs 
seemed comfortable enough, and in fact were putting on weight if anything. 
One afternoon in late February, a warm, rich, appetizing scent, such as the 
animals had never smelt before, wafted itself across the yard from the little 
brewhouse, which had been disused in Jones’s time, and which stood beyond 
the kitchen. Someone said it was the smell of cooking barley. The animals 
sniffed the air hungrily and wondered whether a warm mash was being 
prepared for .their supper. But no warm mash appeared, and on the following 
Sunday it was announced that from now onwards all barley would be reserved 
for the pigs. The field beyond the orchard had already been sown with barley. 
And the news soon leaked out that every pig was now receiving a ration of a 
pint of beer daily, with half a gallon for Napoleon himself, which was always 
served to him in the Grown Derby soup tureen. 



56 


Animal Farm 


But if there were hardships to be borne, they were partly offset by the fact 
that life nowadays had a greater dignity than it had had before. There were 
more songs, more speeches, more processions. Napoleon had commanded that 
once a week there should be held something called a Spontaneous 
Demonstration, the object of which was to celebrate the struggles and 
triumphs of Animal Farm. At the appointed time the animals would leave their 
work and march round the precincts of the farm in military formation, with the 
pigs leading, then the horses, then the cows, then the sheep, and then the 
poultry. The dogs flanked the procession and at the head of all marched 
Napoleon’s black cockerel. Boxer and Clover always carried between them a 
green banner marked with the hoof and the horn and the caption, ‘Long Live 
Comrade Napoleon!’ Afterwards there were recitations of poems composed in 
Napoleon’ s. honour, and a speech by Squealer giving particulars of the latest 
increases in the production of foodstuffs, and on occasion a shot was fired from 
the gun. The sheep were the greatest devotees of the Spontaneous 
Demonstration, and if anyone complained (as a few animals sometimes did, 
when no pigs or dogs were near) that they wasted time and meant a lot of 
standing about in the cold, the sheep were sure to silence him with a 
tremendous bleating of ‘Four legs good, two legs bad!’ But by and large the 
animals enjoyed these celebrations. They found it comforting to be reminded 
that, after all, they were truly their own masters and that the work they did was 
for their own benefit. So that, what with the songs, the processions. Squealer’s 
lists of figures, the thunder of the gun, the crowing of the cockerel, and the 
fluttering of the flag, they were able to forget that their bellies were empty, at 
least part of the time. 

In April, Animal Farm was proclaimed a Republic, and it became necessary 
to elect a President. There was only one candidate, Napoleon, who was elected 
unanimously. On the same day it was given out that fresh documents had been 
discovered which revealed further details about Snowball’s complicity with 
Jones. It now appeared that Snowball had not, as the animals had previously 
imagined, merely attempted to lose the Battle of the Cowshed by means of a 
stratagem, but had been openly fighting on Jones’s side. In fact, it was he who 
had actually been the leader of the human forces, and had charged into battle 
with the words ‘Long live Humanity!’ on his lips. The wounds on Snowball’s 
back, which a few of the animals still remembered to have seen, had been 
inflicted by Napoleon’s teeth. 

In the middle of the summer Moses the raven suddenly reappeared on the 
farm, after an absence of several years. He was quite unchanged, still did no 
work, and talked in the same strain as ever about Sugarcandy Mountain. He 
would perch on a stump, flap his black wings, and talk by the hour to anyone 
who would listen. ‘Up there, comrades,’ he would say solemnly, pointing to 
the sky with his large beak- ‘up there, just on the other side of that dark cloud 
that you can see- there lies Sugarcandy Mountain, that happy country where 
we poor animals shall rest for ever from our labours!’ He even claimed to have 
been there on one of his highter flights, and to have seen the everlasting fields 
of clover and the linseed cake and lump sugar growing on the hedges. Many of 



Animal Farm 57 

the animals believed him. Their lives now, they reasoned, were hungry and 
laborious; was it not right and just that a better world should exist somewhere 
else? A thing that was difficult to determine was the attitude of the pigs towards 
Moses. They all declared contemptuously that his stories about Sugarcandy 
Mountain were lies, and yet they allowed him to remain on the farm, not 
working, with an allowance of a gill of beer a day. 

After his hoof had healed up. Boxer worked harder than ever. Indeed, all the 
animals worked like slaves that year. Apart from the regular work of the farm, 
and the rebuilding of the windmill, there was the schoolhouse for the young 
pigs, which was started in March. Sometimes the long hours on insufficient 
food were hard to bear, but Boxer never faltered. In nothing that he said or did 
was there any sign that his strength was not what it had been. It was only his 
appearance that was a little altered; his hide was less shiny than it had used to 
be, and his great haunches seemed to have shrunken. The others said, ‘Boxer 
will pick up when the spring grass comes on’; but the spring came and Boxer 
grew no fatter. Sometimes on the slope leading to the top of the quarry, when 
he braced his muscles against the weight of some vast boulder, it seemed that 
nothing kept him on his feet except the will to continue. At such times his lips 
were seen to form the words, ‘I will work harder’; he had no voice left. Once 
again Clover and Benjamin warned him to take care of his health, but Boxer 
paid no attention. His twelfth birthday was approaching. He did not care what 
happened so long as a good store of stone was accumulated before he went on 
pension. 

Late one evening in the summer, a sudden rumour ran round the farm that 
something had happened to Boxer. He had gone out alone to drag a load of 
stone down to the windmill. And sure enough, the rumour was true. A few 
minutes later two pigeons came racing in with the news: ‘Boxer has fallen! He 
is lying on his side and can’t get up!’ 

About half the animals on the farm rushed out to the knoll where the 
windmill stood. There lay Boxer, between the shafts of the cart, his neck 
stretched out, unable even to raise his head. His eyes were glazed, his sides 
matted with sweat. A thin stream of blood had trickled out of his mouth. 
Clover dropped to her knees at his side. 

‘Boxer!’ she cried ‘how are you?’ 

‘It is my lung,’ said Boxer in a weak voice. ‘It does not matter. I think you 
will be able to finish the windmill without me. There is a pretty good store of 
stone accumulated. I had only another month to go in any case. To tell you the 
truth, I had been looking forward to my retirement. And perhaps, as Benjamin 
is growing old too, they will let him retire at the same time and be a companion 
to me.’ 

‘We must get help at once,’ said Clover. ‘Run, somebody, and tell Squealer 
what has happened.’ 

All the other animals immediately raced back to the farmhouse to give 
Squealer the news. Only Clover remained, and Benjamin, who lay down at 
Boxer’s side, and, without speaking, kept the flies off him with his long tail. 
After about a quarter of an hour Squealer appeared, full of sympathy and 



Animal Farm 


58 

concern. He said that Comrade Napoleon had learned with the very deepest 
distress of this misfortune to one of the most loyal workers on the farm, and 
was already making arrangements to send Boxer to be treated in the hospital at 
Wilhngdon. The animals felt a little uneasy at this. Except for Mollie and 
Snowball, no other animals had ever left the farm, and they did not like to 
think of their sick comrade in the hands of human beings. However, Squealer 
easily convinced them that the veterinary surgeon in Willingdon could treat 
Boxer’s case more satisfactorily than could be done on the farm And about 
half an hour later, when Boxer had somewhat recovered, he was with difficulty 
got on to his feet, and managed to limp back to his stall, where Clover and 
Benjamin had prepared a good bed of straw for him. 

For the next two days Boxer remained in his stall. The pigs had sent out a 
large bottle of pink medicine which they had found in the medicine chest in the 
bathroom, and Clover administered it to Boxer twice a day after meals. In the 
evenings she lay in his stall and talked to him, while Benjamin kept the flies off 
him. Boxer professed not to be sorry for what had happened. If he made a good 
recovery, he might expect to live another three years, and he looked forward to 
the peaceful days that he would spend in the corner of the big pasture. It would 
be the first time that he had had leisure to study and improve his mind. He 
intended, he said, to devote the rest of his life to learning the remaining 
twenty-two letters of the alphabet. 

However, Benjamin and Clover could only be with Boxer after working 
hours, and it was in the middle of the day when the van came to take him away. 
The animals were all at work weeding turnips under the supervision of a pig, 
when they were astonished to see Benjamin come galloping from the direction 
of the farm buildings, braying at the top of his voice. It was the first time that 
they had ever seen Benjamin excited-indeed, it was the first time that anyone 
had ever seen him gallop. ‘Quick, quick!’ he shouted. ‘Come at once! They’re 
taking Boxer away!’ Without waiting for orders from the pig, the animals 
broke off work and raced back to the farm buildings. Sure enough, there in the 
yard was a large closed van, drawn by two horses, with lettering on its side and 
a sly-looking man in a low-crowned bowler hat sitting on the driver’s seat. And 
Boxer’s stall was empty. 

The animals crowded round the van. ‘Good-bye, Boxer!’ they chorused, 
‘good-bye!’ 

‘Fools! Fools!’ shouted Benjamin, prancing round them and stamping the 
earth with his small hoofs. ‘Fools! Do you not see what is written on the side of 
that van?’ 

That gave the animals pause, and there was a hush. Muriel began to spell out 
the words. But Benjamin pushed her aside and in the midst of a deadly silence 
he read: 

‘“Alfred Simmonds, Horse Slaughterer and Glue Boiler, Willingdon. Dealer 
in Hides and Bone-Meal. Kennels Supplied,” Do you not understand what 
that means? They are taking Boxer to the knacker’s!’ 

A cry of horror burst from all the animals. At this moment the man on the 
box whipped up his horses and the van moved out of the yard at a smart trot. 



Animal Farm 59 

All the animals followed, crying out at the tops of their voices. Clover forced 
her way to the front.- The van began to gather speed. Clover tried to stir her 
stout limbs to a gallop, and achieved a canter. ‘Boxer!’ she cried. ‘Boxer! 
Boxer! Boxer!’ And just at this moment, as though he had heard the uproar 
outside. Boxer’s face, with the white stripe down his nose, appeared at the 
small window at the back of the van. 

‘Boxer!’ cried Clover in a terrible voice. ‘Boxer! Get out! Get out quickly! 
They are taking you to your death!’ 

All the animals took up the cry of ‘Get out, Boxer, get out!’ But the van was 
already gathering speed and drawing away from them. It was uncertain 
whether Boxer had understood what Clover had said. But a moment later his 
face disappeared from the window and there was the sound of a tremendous 
drumming of hoofs inside the van. He was trying to kick his way out. The time 
had been when a few kicks from Boxer’s hoofs would have smashed the van to 
matchwood. But alas! his strength had left him; and in a few moments the 
sound of drumming hoofs grew fainter and died away. In desperation the 
animals began appealing to the two horses which drew the van to stop. 
‘Comrades, comrades!’ they shouted. ‘Don’t take your own brother to this 
death!’ But the stupid brutes, too ignorant to realize what was happening, 
merely set back their ears and quickened their pace. Boxer’s face did not 
reappear at the window. Too late, someone thought of racing ahead and 
shutting the five-barred gate; but in another moment the van was through it 
and rapidly disappearing down the road. Boxer was never seen again. 

Three days later it was announced that he had died in the hospital at 
Willingdon, in spite of receiving every attention a horse could have. Squealer 
came to announce the news to the others. He had, he said, been present during 
Boxer’s last hours. 

‘It was the most affecting sight I have ever seen!’ said Squealer, lifting his 
trotter and wiping away a tear. ‘I was at his bedside at the very last. And at the 
end, almost too weak to speak, he whispered in my ear that his sole sorrow was 
to have passed on before the windmill was finished. “Forward, comrades!” he 
whispered. “Forward in the name of the Rebellion. Long Live Animal Farm! 
Long live Comrade Napoleon! Napoleon is always right.” Those were his very 
last words, comrades.’ 

Here Squealer’s demeanour suddenly changed. He fell silent for a moment, 
and his little eyes darted suspicious glances from side to side before he 
proceeded. 

It had come to his knowledge, he said, that a foolish and wicked rumour had 
been circulated at the time of Boxer’s removal. Some of the animals had 
noticed that the van which took Boxer away was marked ‘Horse Slaughterer’, 
and had actually jumped to the conclusion that Boxer was being sent to the 
knacker’s. It was almost unbelievable, said Squealer, that any animal could be 
so stupid. Surely, he cried indignantly, whisking his tail and skipping from 
side to side, surely they knew their beloved Leader, Comrade Napoleon, better 
than that? But the explanation was tealiy very simple. The van had previously 
been the property of the knacker, and had been bought by the veterinary 



60 Animal Farm 

surgeon, who had not yet painted the old name out. That was how the mistake 
had arisen. 

The animals were enormously relieved to hear this. And when Squealer 
went on to give further graphic details of Boxer’s death bed, the admirable care 
he had received, and the expensive medicines for which Napoleon had paid 
without a thought as to the cost, their last doubts disappeared and the sorrow 
that they felt for their comrade’s death was tempered by the thought that at 
least he had died happy. 

Napoleon himself appeared at the meeting on the following Sunday 
morning and pronounced a short oration in Boxer’s honour. It had not been 
possible, he said, to bring back their lamented comrade’s remains for 
interment on the farm, but he had ordered a large wreath to be made from the 
laurels in the farmhouse garden and sent down to be placed on Boxer’s grave. 
And in a few days’ time the pigs intended to hold a memorial banquet in 
Boxer’s honour. Napoleon ended his speech with a reminder of Boxer’s two 
favourite maxims, ‘I will work harder’ and ‘Comrade Napoleon is always 
right’-maxims, he said, which every animal would do well to adopt as his own. 

On the day appointed for the banquet, a grocer’s van drove up from 
Willingdon and delivered a large wooden crate at the farmhouse. That night 
there was the sound of uproarious singing, which was followed by what 
sounded like a violent quarrel and ended at about eleven o’clock with a 
tremendous crash of glass. No one stirred in the farmhouse before noon on the 
following day, and the word went round that from somewhere or other the pigs 
had acquired the money to buy themselves another case of whisky. 


10 


Years passed. The seasons came and went, the short animal lives fled by. A 
time came when there was no one who remembered the old days before the 
Rebellion, except Clover, Benjamin, Moses the raven, and a number of the 
pigs. 

Muriel was dead; Bluebell, Jessie, and Pincher were dead. Jones too was 
dead-he had died in an inebriates’ home in another part of the country. 
Snowball was forgotten. Boxer was forgotten, except by the few who had 
known him. Clover was an old stout mare now, stiff in the joints, and with a 
tendency to rheumy eyes. She was two years past the retiring age, but in fact no 
animal had ever actually retired. The talk of setting aside a corner of the 
pasture for superannuated animals had long since been dropped. Napoleon 
was now a mature boar of twenty-four stone. Squealer was so fat that he could 
with difficulty see out of his eyes. Only old Benjamin was much the same as 
ever, except for being a little greyer about the muzzle, and, since Boxer’ death. 



Animal Farm 


61 


more morose and taciturn than ever. 

There were many more creatures on the farm now, though the increase was 
not so great as had been expected in earlier years. Many animals had been born 
to whom the Rebellion was only a dim tradition, passed on by word of mouth, 
and others had been bought who had never heard mention of such a thing 
before their arrival. The farm possessed three horses now besides Clover. 
They were fine upstanding beasts, willing workers and good comrades, but 
very stupid. None of them proved able to learn the alphabet beyond the letter 
B. They accepted everything that they were told about the Rebellion and the 
principles of Animalism, especially from Clover, for whom they had an almost 
filial respect; but it was doubtful whether they understood very much of it. 

The farm was more prosperous now, and better organized: it had even been 
enlarged by two fields which had been bought from Mr Pilkington. The 
windmill had been successfully completed at last, and the farm possessed a 
threshing machine and a hay elevator of its own, and various new buildings 
had been added to it. Whymper had bought himself a dogcart. The windmill, 
however, had not after all been used for generating electrical power. It was 
used for milling corn, and brought in a handsome money profit. The animals 
were hard at work building yet another windmill; when that one was finished, 
so it was said, the dynamos would be installed. But the luxuries of which 
Snowball had once taught the animals to dream, the stalls with electric light 
and hot and cold water, and the three-day week, were no longer talked about. 
Napoleon had denounced such ideas as contrary to the spirit of Animalism. 
The truest happiness, he said, lay in working hard and living frugally. 

Somehow it seemed as though the farm had grown richer without making 
the animals themselves any ncher-except, of course, for the pigs and the dogs. 
Perhaps this was partly because there were so many pigs and so many dogs. It 
was not that these creatures did not work, after their fashion. There was, as 
Squealer was never tired of explaining, endless work in the supervision and 
organization of the farm. Much of this work was of a kind that the other 
animals were too ignorant to understand. For example. Squealer told them 
that the pigs had to expend enormous labours every day upon mysterious 
things called ‘files’, ‘reports’, ‘minutes’, and ‘memoranda’. These were large 
sheets of paper which had to be closely covered with writing, and as soon as 
they were so covered, they were burnt in the furnace. This was of the highest 
importance for the welfare of the farm, Squealer said. But still, neither pigs nor 
dogs produced any food by their own labour; and there were very many of 
them, and their appetites were always good. 

As for the others, their life, so far as they knew, was as it had always been. 
They were generally hungry, they slept on straw, they drank from the pool, 
they laboured in the fields; in winter they were troubled by the cold, and in the 
summer by the flies. Sometimes the older ones among them racked their dim 
memories and tried to determine whether in the early days of the Rebellion, 
when Jones’s expulsion was still recent, things had been better or worse than 
now. They could not remember. There was nothing with which they could 
compare their present lives: they had nothing to go upon except Squealer’s 



62 


Animal Farm 


lists of figures, which invariably demonstrated that everything was getting 
better and better. The animals found the problem insoluble; in any case, they 
had little time for speculating on such things now. Only old Benjamin 
professed to remember every detail of his long life and to know that things 
never had been, nor ever could be much better or much worse-hunger, 
hardship, and disappointment being, so he said, the unalterable law of life. 

And yet the animals never gave up hope. More, they never lost, even for an 
instant, their sense of honour and privilege in being members of Animal Farm. 
They were still the only farm in the whole county-in all England! -owned and 
operated by animals. Not one of them, not even the youngest, not even the 
newcomers who had been brought from farms ten or twenty miles away, ever 
ceased to marvel at that. And when they heard the gun booming and saw the 
green flag fluttering at the masthead, their hearts swelled with imperishable 
pride, and the talk always turned towards the old heroic days, the expulsion of 
Jones, the writing of the Seven Commandments, the great battles in which the 
human invaders had been defeated. None of the old dreams had been 
abandoned. The Republic of the Animals which Major had foretold, when the 
green fields of England should be untrodden by human feet, was still believed 
in. Some day it was coming: it might not be soon, it might not be within the 
lifetime of any animal now living, but still it was coming. Even the tune of 
‘Beasts of England’ was perhaps hummed secretly here and there: at any rate, it 
was a fact that every animal on the farm knew it, though no one would have 
dared to sing it aloud. It might be that their lives were hard and that not all of 
their hopes had been fulfilled; but they were conscious that they were not as 
other animals. If they went hungry, it was not from feeding tyrannical human 
beings; if they worked hard, at least they worked for themselves. No creature 
among them went upon two legs. No creature called any other creature 
‘Master’. All animals were equal. 

One day m early summer Squealer ordered the sheep to follow him, and led 
them out to a piece of waste ground at the other end of the farm, which had 
become overgrown with birch saplings. The sheep spent the whole day there 
browsing at the leaves under Squealer’s supervision. In the evening he 
returned to the farmhouse himself, but, as it was warm weather, told the sheep 
to stay where they were. It ended by their remaining there for a whole week, 
during which time the other animals saw nothing of them. Squealer was with 
them for the greater part of every day. He was, he said, teaching them to sing a 
new song, for which privacy was needed. 

It was just after the sheep had returned, on a pleasant evening when the 
animals had finished work and were making their way back to the farm 
buildings, that the terrified neighing of a horse sounded from the yard. 
Startled, the animals stopped in the tracks. It was Clover’s voice. She neighed 
again, and all the animals broke into a gallop and rushed into the yard. Then 
they saw what Clover had seen. 

It was a pig walking on his hind legs. 

Yes, it was Squealer. A little awkwardly, as though not quite used to 
supporting his considerable bulk in that position, but with' perfect balance, he 



Animal Farm 


63 

was strolling across the yard. And a moment later, out from the door of the 
farmhouse came a long file of pigs, all walking on their hind legs. Some did it 
better than others, one or two were even a trifle unsteady and looked as though 
they would have liked the support of a stick, but every one of them made his 
way right round the yard successfully. And finally there was a tremendous 
baying of dogs and a shrill crowing from the black cockerel, and out came 
Napoleon himself, majestically upright, casting haughty glances from side to 
side, and with his dogs gambolling round him. 

He carried a whip in his trotter. 

There was a deadly silence. Amazed, terrified, huddling together, the 
animals watched the long line of pigs march slowly round the yard. It was as 
though the world had turned upside-down. Then there came a moment when 
the first shock had worn off and when, in spite of everything-in spite of their 
terror of the dogs, and of the habit, developed through long years, of never 
complaining, never criticizing, no matter what happened-they might have 
uttered some word of protest. But just at that moment, as though at a signal, all 
the sheep burst out into a tremendous bleating of- 

‘Four legs good, two legs better\ Four legs good, two legs betterl Four legs 
good, two legs betterV 

It went on for five minutes without stopping. And by the time the sheep had 
quieted down, the chance to utter any protest had passed, for the pigs had 
marched back into the farmhouse. 

Benjamin felt a nose nuzzling at his shoulder. He looked round. It was 
Clover. Her old eyes looked dimmer than ever. Without saying anything, she 
tugged gently at his mane and led him round to the end of the big barn, where 
the Seven Commandments were written. For a minute or two they stood 
gazing at the tarred wall with its white lettering. 

‘My sight is failing,’ she said finally. ‘Even when I was young I could not 
have read what was written there. But it appears to me that that wall looks 
different. Are the Seven Commandments the same as they used to be, 
Benjamin?’ 

For once Benjamin consented to break his rule, and he read out to her what 
was written on the wail. There was nothing there now except a single 
Commandment. It ran: 


ALL ANIMALS ARE EQUAL 
BUT SOME ANIMALS ARE MORE 
EQUAL THAN OTHERS 

After that it did not seem strange when next day the pigs who were 
supervising the work of the farm all carried whips in their trotters. It did not 
seem strange to learn that the pigs had bought themselves a wireless set, were 
arranging to install a telephone, and had taken out subscriptions to John Bull, 
Tit-Bits , and the Daily Mirror . It did not seem strange when Napoleon was 
seen strolling in the farmhouse garden with a pipe in hismouth-no, not even 



Animal Farm 


64 

when the pigs took Mr Jones’s clothes out of the wardrobes and put them on. 
Napoleon himself appearing in a black coat, ratcatcher breeches, and leather 
leggings, while his favourite sow appeared in the watered silk dress which Mrs 
Jones had been used to wear on Sundays. ' 

A week later, in the afternoon, a number of dogcarts drove up to the farm. A 
deputation of neighbouring farmers had been invited to make a tour of 
inspection. They were shown all over the farm, and expressed great admiration 
for everything they saw, especially the windmill. The animals were weeding 
the turnip field. They worked diligently, hardly raising their faces from the 
ground, and not knowing whether to be more frightened of the pigs or of the 
human visitiors. 

That evening loud laughter and bursts of singing came from the farmhouse. 
And suddenly, at the sound of the mingled voices, the animals were stricken 
with curiosity. What could be happening in there, now that for the first time 
animals and human beings were meeting on terms of equality? With one 
accord they began to creep as quietly as possible into the farmhouse garden. 

At the gate they paused, half frightened to go on, but Clover led the way in. 
They tiptoed up to the house, and such animals as were tall enough peered in at 
the dining-room window. There, round the long table, sat half a dozen farmers 
and half a dozen of the more eminent pigs, Napoleon himself occupying the 
seat of honour at the head of the table. The pigs appeared completely at ease in 
their chairs. The company had been enjoying a game of cards, but had broken 
off for a moment, evidently in order to drink a toast. A large jug was 
circulating, and the mugs were being refilled with beer. No one noticed the 
wondering faces of the animals that gazed in at the window. 

Mr Pilkington of Foxwood, had stood up, his mug in his hand. In a moment, 
he said, he would ask the present company to drink a toast. But before doing 
so, there were a few words that he felt it incumbent upon him to say. 

It was a source of great satisfaction to him, he said-and, he was sure, to all 
others present- to feel that a long period of mistrust and misunderstanding had 
now come to an end. There had been a time-not that he, or any of the present 
company, had shared such sentiments-but there had been a time when the 
respected proprietors of Animal Farm had been regarded, he would not say 
with hostility, but perhaps with a certain measure of misgiving, by their 
human neighbours. Unfortunate incidents had occurred, mistaken ideas had 
been current. It had been felt that the existence of a farm owned and operated 
by pigs was somehow abnormal and was liable to have an unsettling effect in 
the neighbourhood. Too many farmers had assumed without due inquiry, that 
on such a farm a spirit of licence and indiscipline would prevail. They had been 
nervous about the effects upon their own animals, or even upon their human 
employees. But all such doubts were now dispelled. Today he and his friends 
had visited Animal Farm and inspected every inch of it with their own eyes, 
and what did they find? Not only the most up-to-date methods, but a discipline 
and an orderliness which should be an example to all farmers everywhere. He 
believed that he was right in saying that the lower animals on Animal Farm did 
more work and received less food than any animals in the county. Indeed, he 



Animal Farm 6 5 

and his fellow visitors today had observed many features which they intended 
to introduce on their own farms immediately. 

He would end his remarks, he said, by emphasizing once again the friendly 
feelings that subsisted, and ought to subsist, between Animal Farm and its 
neighbours. Between pigs arid human beings there was not, and there need not 
be, any clash of interests whatever. Their struggles and their difficulties were 
one. Was not the labour problem the same everywhere? Here it became 
apparent that Mr Pilkington was about to spring some carefully prepared 
witticism on the company, but for a moment he was too overcome by 
amusement to be able to utter it. After much choking, during which his various 
chins turned purple, he managed to get it out: ‘If you have your lower animals 
to contend with,’ he said, ‘we have our lower classes!’ This bon mot set the table 
in a roar; and Mr Pilkington once again congratulated the pigs on the low 
rations, the long working hours, and the general absence of pampering which 
he had observed on Animal Farm. 

And now, he said finally, he would ask the company to rise on their feet and 
make certain that their glasses were full. ‘Gentlemen,’ concluded Mr 
Pilkington, ‘gentlemen, I give you a toast: to the prosperity of Animal Farm!’ 

There was enthusiastic cheering and stamping of feet. Napoleon was so 
gratified that he left his place and came round the table to clink his mug against 
Mr Pilkington’s before emptying it. When the cheering had died down, 
Napoleon, who had remained on his feet, intimated that he too had a few words 
to say. 

Like all of Napoleon’s speeches, it was short and to the point. He too, he 
said, was happy that the period of misunderstanding was at an end. For a long 
time there had been rumours-circulated, he had reason to think, by some 
malignant enemy-that there was something subversive and even re- 
volutionary in the outlook of himself and his colleagues. They had been 
credited with attempting to stir up rebellion among the animals on 
neighbouring farms. Nothing could be further from the truth! Their sole wish, 
now and in the past, was to live at peace and in normal business relations with 
their neighbours. This farm which he had the honour to control, he added, was 
a co-operative enterprise. The title-deeds, which were in his own possession, 
were owned by the pigs jointly. 

He did not believe, he said, that any of the old suspicions still lingered, but 
certain changes had been made recently in the routine of the farm which 
should have the effect of promoting confidence still further. Hitherto the 
animals on the farm had had a rather foolish custom of addressing one another 
as ‘Comrade’. This was to be suppressed. There had also been a very strange 
custom, whose origin was unknown, of marching every Sunday morning past a 
boar’s skull which was nailed to a post in the garden. This, too, would be 
suppressed, and the skull had already been buried. His visitors might have 
observed, too, the green flag which flew from the masthead. If so, they would 
perhaps have noted that the white hoof and horn with which it had previously 
been marked had now been removed. It would be a plain green flag from now 
onwards. 



66 


Animal Farm 


He had only one criticism, he said, to make of Mr Pilkington’s excellent and 
neighbourly speech. Mr Pilkington had referred throughout to ‘Animal 
Farm’. He could not of course know-for he, Napoleon, was only now for the 
first time announcing it-that the name, ‘Animal Farm 5 had been abolished. 
Henceforward the farm was to be known as the ‘Manor Farm 5 -which, he 
believed, was its correct and original name. 

‘Gentlemen , 5 concluded Napoleon, ‘I will give you the same toast as before, 
but in a different form. Fill your glasses to the brim. Gentlemen, here is my 
toast: To the prosperity of the Manor Farm ! 5 

There was the same hearty cheering as before, and the mugs were emptied to 
the dregs. But as the animals outside gazed at the scene, it seemed to them that 
some strange thing was happening. What was it that had altered in the faces of 
the pigs? Clover’s old dim eyes flitted from one face to another. Some of them 
had five chins, some had four, some had three. But what was it that seemed to 
be melting and changing. Then, the applause having come to an end, the 
company took up their cards and continued the game that had been 
interrupted, and the animals crept silently away. 

But they had not gone twenty yards when they stopped short. An uproar of 
voices was coming from the farmhouse. They rushed back and looked through 
the window again. Yes, a violent quarrel was in progress. There were 
shoutings, bangings on the table, sharp suspicious glances, furious denials. 
The source of the trouble appeared to be that Napoleon and Mr Pilkington had 
each played an ace of spades simultaneously. 

Twelve voices were shouting in anger, and they were all alike. No question, 
now, what had happened to the faces of the pigs. The creatures outside looked 
| from pig to man, and from man to pig, and from pig to man again; but already 
\ it was impossible to say which was which. 


November 1943-February 1944 





BURMESE DAYS 
‘This desert inaccessible 
Under the shade of melancholy boughs’ 

As you like it. 



I 


U Po Kyin, Sub-divisional Magistrate of Kyauktada, in Upper Burma, was 
sitting in his veranda. It was only half past eight, but the month was April, and 
there was a closeness in the air, a threat of the long, stifling midday hours. 
Occasional faint breaths of wind, seeming cool by contrast, stirred the newly 
drenched orchids that hung from the eaves. Beyond the orchids one could see 
the dusty, curved trunk of a palm tree, and then the blazing ultramarine sky. 
Up in the zenith, so high that it dazzled one to look at them, a few vultures 
circled without the quiver of a wing. 

Unblinking, rather like a great porcelain idol, U Po Kyin gazed out into the 
fierce sunlight. He was a man of fifty, so fat that for years he had not risen from 
his chair without help, and yet shapely and even beautiful in his grossness; for 
the Burmese do not sag and bulge like white men, but grow fat symmetrically, 
like fruits swelling. His face was vast, yellow and quite unwrinkled, and his 
eyes were tawny. His feet-squat, high-arched feet with the toes all the same 
length- were bare, and so was his cropped head, and he wore one of those vivid 
Arakanese longyis with green and magenta checks which the Burmese wear on 
informal occasions. He was chewing betel from a lacquered box on the table, 
and thinking about his past life. 

It had been a brilliantly successful life. U Po Kyin’s earliest memory, back in 
the eighties, was of standing, a naked pot-bellied child, watching the British 
troops march victorious into Mandalay. He remembered the terror he had felt 
of those columns of great beef-fed men, red-faced and red-coated; and the long 
rifles over their shoulders, and the heavy, rhythmic tramp of their boots. He 
had taken to his heels after watching them for a few minutes. In his childish 
way he had grasped that his own people were no match for this race of giants. 
To fight on the side of the British, to become a parasite upon them, had been 
his ruling ambition, even as a child. 

At seventeen he had tried for a Government appointment, but he had failed 
to get it, being poor and friendless, and for three years he had worked in the 
stinking labyrinth of the Mandalay bazaars, clerking for the rice merchants 
and sometimes stealing. Then when he was twenty a lucky stroke of blackmail 
put Mm in possession of four hundred rupees, and he went at once to Rangoon 
and bought Ms way into a Government clerkship. The job was a lucrative one 
though the salary was small. At that time a ring of clerks were making a steady 
income by misappropriating Government stores, and Po Kyin (he was plain Po 
Kyin then* the honorific U came years later) took naturally to this kind of 



74 Burmese Days 

thing. However, he had too much talent to spend his life in a clerkship, stealing 
miserably in annas and pice. One day he discovered that the Government, 
being short of minor officials, were going to make some appointments from 
among the clerks. The news would have become public in another week, but it 
was one of Po Kyin’s qualities that his information was always a week ahead of 
everyone else’s. He saw his chance and denounced all his confederates before 
they could take alarm. Most of them were sent to prison, and Po Kyin was 
made an Assistant Township Officer as the reward of his honesty. Since then 
he had risen steadily. Now, at fifty-six, he was a Sub-divisional Magistrate, 
and he would probably be promoted still further and made an acting Deputy 
Commissioner, with Englishmen as his equals and even his subordinates. 

As a magistrate his methods were simple. Even for the vastest bribe he would 
never sell the decision of a case, because he knew that a magistrate who gives 
wrong judgments is caught sooner or later. His practice, a much safer one, was 
to take bribes from both sides and then decide the case on strictly legal 
grounds. This won him a useful reputation for impartiality. Besides his 
revenue from litigants, U Po Kyin levied a ceaseless toll, a sort of private 
taxation scheme, from all the villages under his jurisdiction. If any village 
failed in its tribute U Po Kyin took punitive measures-gangs of dacoits 
attacked the village, leading villagers were arrested on false charges, and so 
forth-and it was never long before the amount was paid up. He also shared the 
proceeds of all the larger-sized robberies that took place in the district. Most of 
this, of course, was known to everyone except U Po Kyin’s official superiors 
(no British officer will ever believe anything against his own men) but the 
attempts to expose him invariably failed; his supporters, kept loyal by their 
share of the loot, were too numerous. When any accusation was brought 
against him, U Po Kyin simply discredited it with strings of suborned 
witnesses, following this up by counter-accusations which left him in a 
stronger position than ever. He was practically invulnerable, because he was 
too fine a judge of men ever to choose a wrong instrument, and also, because he 
was too absorbed in intrigue ever to fail through carelessness or ignorance. 
One could say with practical certainty that he would never be found out, that 
he would go from success to success, and would finally die full of honour, 
worth several lakhs of rupees. 

And even beyond the grave his success would continue. According to 
Buddhist belief, those who have done evil m their lives will spend the next 
incarnation in the shape of a rat, a frog orsome other low animal. U Po Kyin 
was a good .Buddhist and intended to provide against this danger. He would 
devote his closing years to good works, which would pile up enough merit to 
outweigh the rest of his life. Probably his good works would take the form of 
building pagodas. Four pagodas, five, six, seven-the priests would tell him 
how many-with carved stonework, gilt umbrellas and little bells that tinkled 
in the wind, every tinkle a prayer. And he would Teturn to the earth in male 
human shape- for a woman ranks at about the same level as a rat or a frog-or at 
best as some dignified beast such as an elephant. 

All these thoughts flowed through U Po Kyin’s mind swiftly and for the 



Burmese Days 75 

most part in pictures. His brain, though cunmng, was quite barbaric, and it 
never worked except for some definite end; mere meditation was beyond him. 
He had now reached the point to which his thoughts had been tending. Putting 
his smallish, triangular hands on the arms of his chair, he turned himself a little 
way round and called, rather wheezily: 

c Ba Talk! Hey, Ba Taik!’ 

Ba Taik, U Po Kyin’s servant, appeared through the beaded curtain of the 
veranda. He was an under-sized, pock-marked man with a timid and rather 
hungry expression. U Po Kyin paid him no wages, for he was a convicted thief 
whom a word would send to prison. As Ba Taik advanced he shikoed, so low as 
to give the impression that he was stepping backwards. 

‘Most holy god?’ he said. 

‘Is anyone waiting to see me, Ba Taik? 7 

Ba Taik enumerated the visitors upon his fingers - ‘There is the headman of 
Thitpingyi village, your honour, who has brought presents, and two villagers 
who have an assault case that is to be tried by your honour, and they too have 
brought presents. Ko Ba Sein, the head clerk of the Deputy Commissioner’s 
office, wishes to see you, and there is Ali Shah, the police constable, and a 
dacoit whose name I do not know. I think they have quarrelled about some 
gold bangles they have stolen. And there is also a young village girl with a 
baby. 7 

‘What does she want? 7 said U Po Kyin. 

‘She says that the baby is yours, most holy one. 7 

‘Ah. And how much has the headman brought? 7 

Ba Taik thought it was only ten rupees and a basket of mangoes. 

‘Tell the headman, 7 said U Po Kyin, ‘that it should be twenty rupees, and 
there will be trouble for him and his village if the money is not here tomorrow. 
I will see the others presently. Ask Ko Ba Sein to come to me here. 7 

Ba Sein appeared in a moment. He was an erect, narrow-shouldered man, 
very tall for a Burman, with a curiously smooth face that recalled a coffee 
blancmange. U Po Kyin found him a useful tool. Unimaginative and hard- 
working, he was an excellent clerk, and Mr Macgregor, the Deputy 
Commissioner, trusted him with most of his official secrets, U Po Kyin, put in 
a good temper by his thoughts, greeted Ba Sein with a laugh and waved to the 
betel box. 

‘Well, Ko Ba Sein, how does our affair progress? I hope that, as dear Mr 
Macgregor would say 7 -U Po Kyin broke into English-‘“eet ees making 
perceptible progress 77 ? 7 

Ba Sein did not smile at the small joke. Sitting down stiff and long-backed in 
the vacant chair, he answered: 

‘Excellently, sir. Our copy of the paper arrived this morning. Kindly 
observe. 7 

He produced a copy of a bilingual paper called the Burmese Patriot. It was a 
miserable eight-page rag, villainously printed on paper as bad as blotting 
paper, and composed partly of news stolen from the Rangoon Gazette, partly of 
weak Nationalist heroics. On the last page the type had slipped and left the 



y6 Burmese Days 

entire sheet jet black, as though in mourning for the smallness of the paper’s 
circulation. The article to which U Po Kyin turned was of a rather different 
stamp from the rest. It ran: 

In these happy times, when we poor blacks are being uplifted by the mighty western civilization, 
with its manifold blessings such as the cinematograph, machine-guns, syphilis, etc , what subject 
could be more inspiring than the private lives of our European benefactors’ We think therefore 
that it may interest our readers to hear something of events in the up-country district of 
Kyauktada And especially of Mr Macgregor, honoured Deputy Commissioner of said district 

Mr Macgregor is of the type of the Fine Old English Gentleman, such as, in these happy days, 
we have so many examples before our eyes He is ‘a family man’ as our dear English cousins say 
Very much a family man is Mr Macgregor So much so that he has already three children in the 
district of Kyauktada, where he has been a year, and in his last district of Shwemyo he left six 
young progenies behind him Perhaps it is an oversight on Mr Macgxegor’s part that he has left 
these young infants quite unprovided for, and that some of their mothers are in danger of 
starvation, etc , etc., etc 

There was a column of similar stuff, and wretched as it was, it was well above 
the level of the rest of the paper. U Po Kyin read the article carefully through, 
holding it at arm’s length-he was long-sighted-and drawing his lips 
meditatively back, exposing great numbers of small, perfect teeth, blood-red 
from betel juice. 

‘The editor will get six months’ imprisonment for this,’ he said finally. 

‘He does not mind. He says that the only time when his creditors leave him 
alone is when he is in prison.’ 

‘And you say that your little apprentice clerk Hla Pe wrote this article all by 
himself? That is a very clever boy-a most promising boy! Never tell me again 
that these Government High Schools are a waste of time. Hla Pe shall certainly 
have his clerkship.’ 

‘You think then, sir, that this article will be enough?’ 

U Po Kyin did not answer immediately. A puffing, labouring noise began to 
proceed from him; he was trying to rise from his chair. Ba Taik was familiar 
with this sound. He appeared from behind the beaded curtain, and he and Ba 
Sein put a hand under each of U Po Kyin’s armpits and hoisted him to his feet. 
U Po Kyin stood for a moment balancing the weight of his belly upon his legs, 
with the movement of a fish porter adjusting his load. Then he waved Ba Taik 
away. 

‘Not enough,’ he said, answering Ba Sein’s question, ‘not enough by any 
means. There is a lot to be done yet. But this is the right beginning. Listen.’ 

He went to the rail to spit out a scarlet mouthful of betel, and then began to 
quarter the veranda with short steps, his hands behind his back. The friction of 
his vast thighs made him waddle slightly. As he walked he talked, in the base 
jargon of the Government offices-a patchwork of Burmese verbs and English 
abstract phrases: 

‘Now, let us go into this affair from the beginning. We are going to make a 
concerted attack on Dr Veraswami, who is the Civil .Surgeon and 
Superintendent of the jail. We are going to slander him, destroy his reputation 
and finally ruin him for ever. It will be rather a delicate operation.’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 



Burmese Days 77 

‘There will be no risk, but we have got to go slowly. We are not proceeding 
against a miserable clerk or police constable. We are proceeding against a high 
official and with a high official, even when he is an Indian, it is not the same as 
with a clerk. How does one ruin a clerk? Easy; an accusation, two dozen 
witnesses, dismissal and imprisonment. But that will not do here. Softly, 
softly, softly is my way. No scandal, and above all no official inquiry. There 
must be no accusations that can be answered, and yet within three months I 
must fix it in the head of every European m Kyauktada that the doctor is a 
villain. What shall I accuse him of? Bribes will not do, a doctor does not get 
bribes to any extent. What then?’ 

‘We could perhaps arrange a mutiny in the jail,’ said Ba Sein. ‘As 
superintendent, the doctor would be blamed.’ 

‘No, it is too dangerous. I do not want the jail warders firing their rifles in all 
directions. Besides, it would be expensive. Clearly, then, it must be 
disloyalty-Nationalism, seditious propaganda. We must persuade the 
Europeans that the doctor holds disloyal, anti-British opinions. That is far 
worse than bribery; they expect a native official to take bribes. But let them 
suspect his loyalty even for a moment, and he is ruined.’ 

‘It would be a hard thing to prove,’ objected Ba Sein. ‘The doctor is very 
loyal to the Europeans. He grows angry when anything is said against them. 
They will know that, do you not think?’ 

‘Nonsense, nonsense,’ said U Po Kyin comfortably. ‘No European cares 
anything about proofs. When a man has a black face, suspicion is proof. A few 
anonymous letters will work wonders. It is only a question of persisting; 
accuse, accuse, go on accusing-that is the way with Europeans. One 
anonymous letter after another, to every European in turn. And then, when 
their suspicions are thoroughly aroused-’ U Po Kyin brought one short arm 
from behind his back and clicked his thumb and finger. He added: ‘We begin 
with this article in the Burmese Patriot. The Europeans will shout with rage 
when they see it. Well, the next move is to persuade them that it was the doctor 
who wrote it.’ 

‘It will be difficult while he has friends among the Europeans. All of them go 
to him when they are ill. He cured Mr Macgregor of his flatulence this cold 
weather. They consider him a very clever doctor, I believe.’ 

‘How little you understand the European mind, Ko Ba Sein! If the 
Europeans go to Veraswami it is only because there is no other doctor in 
Kyauktada. No European has any faith in a man with a black face. No, with 
anonymous letters it is only a question of sending enough. I shall soon see to it 
that he has no friends left.’ 

‘There is Mr Flory, the timber merchant,’ said Ba Sein. (He pronounced it 
‘Mr Porley’.) ‘He is a close friend of the doctor. I see him go to his house every 
morning when he is in Kyauktada. Twice he has even invited the doctor to 
dinner.’ 

‘Ah, now there you are right. If Flory were a friend of the doctor it could do 
us harm. You cannot hurt an Indian when he has a European friend. It gives 
him-what is that word they are so fond of?-prestige. But Flory will desert his 



j8 Burmese Days 

friend quickly enough when the trouble begins. These people have no feeling 
of loyalty towards a native. Besides, I happen to know that Flory is a coward. I 
can deal with him. Your part, Ko Ba Sem, is to watch Mr Macgregor’s 
movements. Has he written to the Commissioner lately-written confiden- 
tially, I mean? 5 

‘He wrote two days ago, but when we steamed the letter open we found it 
was nothing of importance.’ 

‘Ah well, we will give him something to write about. And as soon as he 
suspects the doctor, then is the time for that other affair I spoke to you of. Thus 
we shall-what does Mr Macgregor say? Ah yes, “kill two birds with one 
stone”. A whole flock of birds-ha, ha!’ 

U Po Kym’s laugh was a disgusting bubbling sound deep down in his belly, 
like the preparation for a cough; yet it was merry, even childlike. He did not 
say any more about the ‘other affair’, which was too private to be discussed 
even upon the veranda. Ba Sein, seeing the interview at an end, stood up and 
bowed, angular as a jointed ruler. 

‘Is there anything else your honour wishes done?’ he said. 

‘Make sure that Mr Macgregor has his copy of the Burmese Patriot. You had 
better tell Hla Pe to have an attack of dysentery and stay away from the office. I 
shall want him for the writing of the anonymous letters. That is all for the 
present.’ 

‘Then I may go, sir?’ 

‘God go with you, 5 said U Po Kyin rather abstractedly, and at once shouted 
again for Ba Taik. He never wasted a moment of his day. It did not take him 
long to deal with the other visitors and to send the village girl away 
unrewarded, having examined her face and said that he did not recognize her. 
It was now his breakfast time. Violent pangs of hunger, which attacked him 
punctually at this hour every morning, began to torment his belly. He shouted 
urgently: 

‘Ba Taik! Hey, Ba Taik! Kin Kin! My breakfast! Be quick, I am starving.’ 

In the living-room behind the curtain a table was already set out with a huge 
bowl of rice and a dozen plates containing curries, dried prawns and sliced 
green mangoes. U Po Kyin waddled to the table, sat down with a grunt and at 
once threw himself on the food. Ma Kin, his wife, stood behind him and served 
him. She was a thin woman of five and forty, with a kindly, pale brown, simian 
face. U Po Kyin took no notice of her while he was eating. With the bowl close 
to his nose he stuffed the food into himself with swift, greasy fingers, breathing 
fast. All his meals were swift, passionate and enormous; they were not meals so 
much as orgies, debauches of curry and rice. When he had finished he sat back, 
belched several times and told Ma Kin to fetch him a green Burmese cigar. He 
never smoked English tobacco, which he declared had no taste in it. 

Presently, with Ba Taik’s help, U Po Kyin dressed in his office clothes, and 
stood for a while admiring himself in the long mirror in the living-room. It was 
a wooden-walled room with two pillars, still recognizable as teak-trunks, 
supporting the roof-tree, and it was dark and sluttish as all Burmese rooms are, 
though U Po Kyin had furnished it ‘Ingaleik fashion’ with a veneered 



Burmese Days 79 

sideboard and chairs, some lithographs of the Royal Family and a fire- 
extinguisher. The floor was covered with bamboo mats, much splashed by 
lime and betel juice. 

Ma Kin was sitting on a mat in the corner, stitching an ingyi. U Po Kyin 
turned slowly before the mirror, trying to get a glimpse of his back view. He 
was dressed in agaungbaung of pale pink silk, an ingyt of starched muslin, and a 
paso of Mandalay silk, a gorgeous salmon-pink brocaded with yellow. With an 
effort he turned his head round and looked, pleased, at the paso tight and 
shining on his enormous buttocks. He was proud of his fatness, because he saw 
the accumulated flesh as the symbol of his greatness. He who had once been 
obscure and hungry was now fat, rich and feared. He was swollen with the 
bodies of his enemies; a thought from which he extracted something very near 
poetry. 

‘My new paso was cheap at twenty-two rupees, hey, Kin Kin?’ he said. 

Ma Kin bent her head over her sewing. She was a simple, old-fashioned 
woman, who had learned even less of European habits than U Po Kyin. She 
could not sit on a chair without discomfort. Every morning she went to the 
bazaar with a basket on her head, like a village woman, and in the evenings she 
could be seen kneeling in the garden, praying to the white spire of the pagoda 
that crowned the town. She had been the confidante of U Po Kyin’s intrigues 
for twenty years and more. 

‘Ko Po Kyin,’ she said, ‘you have done very much evil in your life.’ 

U Po Kyin waved his hand. ‘What does it matter? My pagodas will atone for 
everything. There is plenty of time.’ 

Ma Kin bent her head over her sewing again, in an obstinate way she had 
when she disapproved of something that U Po Kyin was doing. 

‘But, Ko Po Kyin, where is the need for all this scheming and intriguing? I 
heard you talking with Ko Ba Sein on the veranda. You are planning some evil 
against Dr Veraswami. Why do you wish to harm that Indian doctor? He is a 
good man.’ 

‘What do you know of these official matters, woman? The doctor stands in 
my way. In the first place he refuses to take bribes, which makes it difficult for 
the rest of us. And besides-well, there is something else which you would 
never have the brains to understand.’ 

‘Ko Po Kyin, you have grown rich and powerful, and what good has it ever 
done you? We were happier when we were poor. Ah, I remember so well when 
you were only a Township Officer, the first time we had a house of our own. 
How proud we were of our new wicker furniture, and your fountain-pen with 
the gold clipl And when the young English police-officer came to our house 
and sat in the best chair and drank a bottle of beer, how honoured we thought 
ourselves! Happiness is not in money. What can you want with more money 
now?’ 

‘Nonsense, woman, nonsense! Attend to your cooking and sewing and leave 
official matters to those who understand them. 5 

‘Well, I do not know. I am your wife and have always obeyed you. But at 
least it is never too soon to acquire merit. Strive to acquire mote merit, Ko Po 



80 Burmese Days 

Kyin! Will you not, for instance, buy some live fish and set them free in the 
river? One can acquire much merit in that way. Also, this morning when 
the priests came for their rice they told me that there are two new priests at the 
monastery, and they are hungry. Will you not give them something, Ko Po 
Kyin? I did not give them anything myself, so that you might acquire the merit 
of doing it.’ 

U Po Kyin turned away from the mirror. The appeal touched him a little. 
He never, when it could be done without inconvenience, missed a chance of 
acquiring merit. In his eyes his pile of merit was a kind of bank deposit, 
everlastingly growing. Every fish set free in the river, every gift to a priest, was 
a step nearer Nirvana. It was a reassuring thought. He directed that the basket 
of mangoes brought by the village headman should be sent down to the 
monastery. 

Presently he left the house and started down the road, with Ba Taik behind 
him carrying a file of papers. He walked slowly, very upright to balance his vast 
belly, and holding a yellow silk umbrella over his head. His pink paso glittered 
in the sun like a satin praline. He was going to the court, to try his day’s cases. 


2 


At about the time when U Po Kyin began his morning’s business, ‘Mr Porley’ 
the timber merchant and friend of Dr Veraswami, was leaving his house for the 
Club. 

Flory was a man of about thirty-five, of middle height, not ill made. He had 
very black, stiff hair growing low on his head, and a cropped black moustache, 
and his skin, naturally sallow, was discoloured by the sun. Not having grown 
fat or bald he did not look older than his age, but his face was very haggard in 
spite of the sunburn, with lank cheeks and a sunken, withered look round the 
eyes. He had obviously not shaved this morning. He was dressed in the usual 
white shirt, khaki drill shorts and stockings, but instead of a topi he wore a 
battered Terai hat, cocked over one eye. He carried a bamboo stick with a 
wrist-thong, and a black cocker spaniel named Flo was ambling after him. 

All these were secondary expressions, however. The first thing that one 
noticed in Flory was a hideous birthmark stretching in a ragged crescent down 
his left cheek, from the eye to the corner of the mouth. Seen from the left side 
his face had a battered, woebegone look, as though the birthmark had been a 
bruise-for it was a dark blue in colour. He was quite aware of its hideousness. 
And at all times, when he was not alone, there was a sidelongness about his 
movements, as he manoeuvred constantly to keep the birthmark out of sight. 

Flory’s house was at the top of the maidan, close to the edge of the jungle. 
From the gate the maidan sloped sharply down, scorched and khaki-coloured, 



Burmese Days 81 

with half a dozen dazzling white bungalows scattered round it. All quaked, 
shivered in the hot air. There was an English cemetery within a white wall 
half-way down the hill, and near by a tiny tin-roofed church. Beyond that was 
the European Club, and when one looked at the Club -a dumpy one-storey 
wooden building-one looked at the real centre of the town. In any town in 
India the European Club is the spiritual citadel, the real seat of the British 
power, the Nirvana for which native officials and millionaires pine in vain It 
was doubly so in this case, for it was the proud boast of Kyauktada Club that, 
almost alone of Clubs in Burma, it had never admitted an Oriental to 
membership. Beyond the Club, the Irrawaddy flowed huge and ochreous 
glittering like diamonds in the patches that caught the sun; and beyond the 
river stretched great wastes of paddy fields, ending at the horizon in a range of 
blackish hills. 

The native town, and the courts and the jail, were over to the right, mostly 
hidden in green groves of peepul trees. The spire of the pagoda rose from the 
trees like a slender spear tipped with gold. Kyauktada was a fairly typical 
Upper Burma town, that had not changed greatly between the days of Marco 
Polo and 1910, and might have slept in the Middle Ages for a century more if it 
had not proved a convenient spot for a railway terminus. In 1910 the 
Government made it the headquarters of a district and a seat of 
Progress-interpretable as a block of law courts, with their army of fat but 
ravenous pleaders, a hospital, a school and one of those huge, durable jails 
which the English have built everywhere between Gibraltar and Hong Kong, 
The population was about four thousand, including a couple of hundred 
Indians, a few score Chinese and seven Europeans. There were also two 
Eurasians named Mr Francis and Mr Samuel, the sons of an American Baptist 
missionary and a Roman Catholic missionary respectively. The town 
contained no curiosities of any kind, except an Indian fakir who had lived for 
twenty years in a tree near the bazaar, drawing his food up in a basket every 
morning. 

Flory yawned as he came out of the gate. He had been half drunk the night 
before, and the glare made him feel liverish. ‘Bloody, bloody hole!’ he 
thought, looking down the hill. And, no one except the dog being near, he 
began to sing aloud, ‘Bloody, bloody, bloody, oh, how thou art bloody’ to the 
tune of ‘Holy, holy, holy, oh how Thou art holy ’ as he walked down the hot 
red road, swishing at the dried-up grasses with his stick. It was nearly nine 
o’clock and the sun was fiercer every minute. The heat throbbed down on 
one’s head with a steady, rhythmic thumping, like blows from an enormous 
bolster. Flory stopped at the Club gate, wondering whether to go in or to go 
farther down the road and see Dr Veraswami. Then he remembered that it was 
‘English mail day’ and the newspapers would have arrived. He went in, past 
the big tennis screen, which was overgrown by a creeper with starlike mauve 
flowers. 

In the borders beside the path swaths of English ftowers-phlox and 
larkspur, hollyhock and petunia-not yet slain by the sun, rioted in vast size 
and richness. The petunias were huge, like trees almost. There was no lawn. 



82 Burmese Days 

but instead a shrubbery of native trees and bushes-gold mohur trees like vast 
umbrellas of blood-red bloom, frangipanis with creamy, stalkless flowers, 
purple bougainvillea, scarlet hibiscus and the pink Chinese rose, bilious-green 
crotons, feathery fronds of tamarind. The clash of colours hurt one’s eyes in 
the glare. A nearly naked mali, watering-can in hand, was moving in the jungle 
of flowers like some large nectar- sucking bird. 

On the Club steps a sandy-haired Englishman, with a prickly moustache, 
pale grey eyes too far apart, and abnormally thin calves to his legs, was 
standing with his hands in the pockets of his shorts. This was Mr Westfield, 
the District Superintendent of Police. With a very bored air he was rocking 
himself backwards and forwards on his heels and pouting his upper lip so that 
his moustache tickled his nose. He greeted Flory with a slight sideways 
movement of his head. His way of speaking was clipped and soldierly, missing 
out every word that well could be missed out. Nearly everything he said was 
intended for a joke, but the tone of his voice was hollow and melancholy. 

c Hullo, Flory me lad. Bloody awful morning, what?’ 

‘We must expect it at this time of year, I suppose,’ Flory said. He had turned 
himself a little sideways, so that his birthmarked cheek was away from 
Westfield. 

‘Yes, dammit. Couple of months of this coming. Last year we didn’t have a 
spot of rain till June. Look at that bloody sky, not a cloud in it. Like one of 
those damned great blue enamel saucepans. God! What’d you give to be in 
Piccadilly now, eh?’ 

‘Have the English papers come?’ 

‘Yes. Dear old Punch, Pink’un and Vie Parisienne. Makes you homesick to 
read ’em, what? Let’s come in and have a drink before the ice all goes. Old 
Lackersteen’s been fairly bathing in it. Half pickled already.’ 

They went in, Westfield remarking in his gloomy voice, ‘Lead on, Macduff.’ 
Inside, the Club was a teak-walled place smelling of earth-oil, and consisting 
of only four rooms, one of which contained a forlorn ‘library’ of five hundred 
mildewed novels, and another an old and mangy billiard-table- this, however, 
seldom used, for during most of the year hordes of flying beetles came buzzing 
round the lamps and littered themselves over the cloth. There were also a card- 
room and a ‘lounge’ which looked towards the river, over a wide veranda; but 
at this time of day all the verandas were curtained with green bamboo chicks. 
The lounge was an unhomelike room, with coco-nut matting on the floor, and 
wicker chairs and tables which were littered with shiny illustrated papers. For 
ornament there were a number of ‘Bonza’ pictures, and the dusty skulls of 
sambhur. A punkah, lazily flapping, shook dust into the tepid air. 

There were three men in the room. Under the punkah a florid, fine-looking, 
slightly bloated man of forty was sprawling across the table with his head in his 
hands, groaning in pain. This was Mr Lackersteen, the local manager of a 
timber firm. He had been badly drunk the night before, and he was suffering 
for it, Ellis, local manager of yet another company, was standing before the 
notice-board studying some notice with a look of bitter concentration. He was 
a tiny wiry-haired fellow with a pale, sharp-featured face and restless 



Burmese Days 8 3 

movements. Maxwell, the acting Divisional Forest Officer, was lying in one of 
the long chairs reading the Field, and invisible except for two large-boned legs 
and thick downy forearms. 

‘Look at this naughty old man, 5 said Westfield, taking Mr Lackersteen half 
affectionately by the shoulders and shaking him. ‘Example to the young, what? 
There but for the grace of God and all that. Gives you an idea what you’ll be 
like at forty.’ 

Mr Lackersteen gave a groan which sounded like ‘brandy’. 

‘Poor old chap,’ said Westfield, ‘regular martyr to booze, eh? Look at it 
oozing out of his pores. Reminds me of the old colonel who used to sleep 
without a mosquito net. They asked his servant why and the servant said: “At 
night, master too drunk to notice mosquitoes; in the morning, mosquitoes too 
drunk to notice master.” Look at him-boozed last night and then asking for 
more. Got a little niece coming to stay with him, too. Due tonight, isn’t she, 
Lackersteen?’ 

‘Oh, leave that drunken sot alone,’ said Ellis without turning round. He had 
a spiteful Cockney voice. Mr Lackersteen groaned again, ‘ — the niece! Get 
me some brandy, for Christ’s sake.’ 

‘Good education for the niece, ehP Seeing uncle under the table seven times 
a week. Hey, butler! Bringing brandy for Lackersteen master!’ 

The butler, a dark, stout Dravidian with liquid, yellow-irised eyes like those 
of a dog, brought the brandy on a brass tray. Flory and Westfield ordered gin. 
Mr Lackersteen swallowed a few spoonfuls of brandy and sat back in his chair, 
groaning in a more resigned way. He had a beefy, ingenuous face, with a 
toothbrush moustache. He was really a very simple-minded man, with no 
ambitions beyond having what he called ‘a good time’. His wife governed him 
by the only possible method, namely, by never letting him out of her sight for 
more than an hour or two. Only once, a year after they were married, she had 
left him for a fortnight, and had returned unexpectedly a day before her time, 
to find Mr Lackersteen, drunk, supported on either side by a naked Burmese 
girl, while a third up-ended a whisky bottle into his mouth. Since then she 
had watched him, as he used to complain, ‘like a cat over a bloody mousehole’. 
However, he managed to enjoy quite a number of ‘good times’, though they 
were usually rather hurried ones. 

‘My Christ, what a head I’ve got on me this morning,’ he said. ‘Call that 
butler again, Westfield, I’ve got to have another brahdy before my missus gets 
here. She says she’s going to cut my booze down to four pegs a day when our 
niece gets here. God rot them both!’ he added gloomily. 

‘Stop playing the fool, all of you, and listen to this,’ said Ellis sourly. He had 
a queer wounding way of speaking, hardly eyer opening his mouth without 
insulting somebody. He deliberately exaggerated his Cockney accent, because 
of the sardonic tone it gave to his words. ‘Have you seen this notice of old 
Macgregor’s? A little nosegay for everyone. Maxwell, wake up and listen!’ 

Maxwell lowered the Field. He was a fresh-coloured blond youth of not 
more than twenty-five or six-very young for the post he held. With his heavy 
limbs and thick white eyelashes he reminded one of a cart-horse colt, Elhs 



84 Burmese Days 

nipped the notice from the board with a neat, spiteful little movement and 
began reading it aloud. It had been posted by Mr Macgregor, who, besides 
being Deputy Commissioner, was secretary of the Club. 

‘Just listen to this. “It has been suggested that as there are as yet no Oriental 
members of this club, and as it is now usual to admit officials of gazetted rank, 
whether native or European, to membership of most European Clubs, we 
should consider the question of following this practice in Kyauktada. The 
matter will be open for discussion at the next general meeting. On the one hand 
it may be pointed out”-oh, well, no need to wade through the rest of it. He 
can’t even write a notice without an attack of literary diarrhoea. Anyway, the 
point’s this. He’s asking us to break all our rules and take a dear little nigger- 
boy into this Club. Dear Dr Veraswami, for instance. Dr Very-slimy, 1 call 
him. That would be a treat, wouldn’t it? Little pot-bellied niggers breathing 
garlic in your face over the bridge-table. Christ, to think of it! We’ve got to 
hang together and put our foot down on this at once. What do you say, 
Westfield? Flory?’ 

Westfield shrugged his thin shoulders philosophically. He had sat down at 
the table and lighted a black, stinking Burma cheroot. 

‘Got to put up with it, I suppose,’ he said. ‘B — s of natives are getting into all 
the Clubs nowadays. Even the Pegu Club, I’m told. Way this country’s going, 
you know We’re about the last Club in Burma to hold out against ’em.’ 

‘We are; and what’s more, we’re damn well going to go on holding out. I’ll 
die in the ditch before I’ll see a nigger in here.’ Ellis had produced a stump of 
pencil. With the curious air of spite that some men can put into their tiniest 
action, he re-pinned the notice on the board and pencilled a tiny, neat ‘B F.’ 
against Mr Macgregor’s signature- ‘There, that’s what I think of his idea. I’ll 
tell him so when he comes down. What do you say, Flory?’ 

Flory had not spoken all this time. Though by nature anything but a silent 
man, he seldom found much to say in Club conversations. He had sat down at 
the table and was reading G. K. Chesterton’s article in the London News, at the 
same time caressing Flo’s head with his left hand. Ellis, however, was one of 
those people who constantly nag others to echo their own opinions. He 
repeated his question, and Flory looked up, and their eyes met. The skin round 
Ellis’s nose suddenly turned so pale that it was almost grey. In him it was a sign 
of anger. Without any prelude he burst into a stream of abuse that would have 
been startling, if the others had not been used to hearing something like it 
every morning. 

‘My God, I should have thought in a case like this, when it’s a question of 
keeping those black, stinking swine out of the only place where we can enjoy 
ourselves, you’d have the decency to back me up. Even if that pot-bellied 
greasy little sod of a nigger doctor is your best pal. I don’t care if you choose to 
pal up with the scum of the bazaar. If it pleases you to go to Veraswami’s house 
and drink whisky with all his nigger pals, that’s your look-out. Do what you 
like outside the Club. But, by God, it’s a different matter when you talk of 
bringing niggers in here. I suppose you’d like little Veraswami for a Club 
member, eh? Chipping into our conversation and pawing everyone with 



Burmese Days 8 5 

his sweaty hands and breathing his filthy garlic breath in our faces. By god, 
he’d go out with my boot behind him if ever I saw his black snout inside that 
door. Greasy, pot-bellied little-!’ etc 

This went on for several minutes. It was curiously impressive, because it 
was so completely sincere. Ellis really did hate Orientals-hated them with 
a bitter, restless loathing as of something evil or unclean. Living and working, 
as the assistant of a timber firm must, in perpetual contact with the Burmese, 
he had never grown used to the sight of a black face. Any hint of friendly 
feeling towards an Oriental seemed to him a horrible perversity. He was an 
intelligent man and an able servant of his firm, but he was one of those 
Englishmen-common, unfortunately- who should never be allowed to set foot 
in the East. 

Flory sat nursing Flo’s head in his lap, unable to meet Ellis’s eyes. At the 
best of times his birthmark made it difficult for him to look people straight in 
the face. And when he made ready to speak, he could feel his voice 
trembling-for it had a way of trembling when it should have been firm; his 
features, too, sometimes twitched uncontrollably, 

‘Steady on,’ he said at last, sullenly and rather feebly. ‘Steady on. There’s no 
need to get so excited. I never suggested having any native members in here.’ 
‘Oh, didn’t you? We all know bloody well you’d like to, though. Why else do 
you go to that oily little babu’s house every morning, then? Sitting down at 
table with him as though he was a white man, and drinking out of glasses his 
filthy black lips have slobbered over-it makes me spew to think of it.’ 

‘Sit down, old chap, sit down,’ Westfield said. ‘Forget it. Have a drink on it. 
Not worth while quarrelling. Too hot.’ 

‘My God,’ said Ellis a little more calmly, taking a pace or two up and down, 
‘my God, I don’t understand you chaps. I simply don’t. Here’s that old fool 
Macgregor wanting to bring a nigger into this Club for no reason whatever, 
and you all sit down under it without a word. Good God, what are we supposed 
to be doing in this country? If we aren’t going to rule, why the devil don’t we 
clear out? Here we are, supposed to be governing a set of damn black swine 
who’ve been slaves since the beginning of history, and instead of ruling them 
in the only way they understand, we go and treat them as equals. And you silly 
b — s take it for granted. There’s Flory, makes his best pal a black babu who 
calls himself a doctor because he’s done two years at an Indian so-called 
university. And you, Westfield, proud as Punch of your knock-kneed, bribe- 
taking cowards of policemen. And there’s Maxwell, spends his time running 
after Eurasian tarts. Yes, you do, Maxwell; I heard about your goings-on in 
Mandalay with some smelly little bitch called Molly Pereira. I suppose you’d 
have gone and married her if they hadn’t transferred you up here? You all seem 
to like the dirty black brutes. Christ, I don’t know what’s come over us all. I 
really don’t.’ 

‘Come on, have another drink,’ said Westfield. ‘Hey, butler! Spot of beer 
before the ice goes, eh? Beer, butler!’ 

The butler brought some bottles of Munich beer. Ellis presently sat down at 
the table with the others, and ha nursed one of the cool bottles between his 



86 Burmese Days 

small hands. His forehead was sweating. He was sulky, but not in a rage any 
longer. At all times he was spiteful and perverse, but his violent fits of rage 
were soon over, and were never apologized for. Quarrels were a regular part of 
the routine of Club life. Mr Lackersteen was feeling better and was studying 
the illustrations in La Vie Parisienne. It was after nine now, and the room, 
scented with the acrid smoke of Westfield’s cheroot, was stifling hot. 
Everyone’s shirt stuck to his back with the first sweat of the day. The invisible 
chokra who pulled the punkah rope outside was falling asleep in the glare. 

‘Butler!’ yelled Ellis, and as the butler appeared, ‘go and wake that bloody 
chokra up!’ 

‘Yes, master.’ 

‘And butler!’ 

‘Yes, master?’ 

‘How much ice have we got left?’ 

‘’Bout twenty pounds, master. Will only last today, I think. I find it very 
difficult to keep ice cool now.’ 

‘Don’t talk like that, damn you-“I find it very difficult!” Have you 
swallowed a dictionary? “Please, master, can’t keeping ice cool”— that’s how 
you ought to talk. We shall have to sack this fellow if he gets to talk English too 
well. I can’t stick servants who talk English. D’you hear, butler?’ 

‘Yes, master,’ said the butler, and retired. 

‘God! No ice till Monday,’ Westfield said. ‘You going back to the jungle, 
Flory?’ 

‘Yes. I ought to be there now. I only came in because of the English mail.’ 

‘Go on tour myself, I think. Knock up a spot of Travelling Allowance. I 
cafi’t stick my bloody office at this time of year. Sitting there under the damned 
punkah, signing one chit after another. Paper-chewing. God, how I wish the 
war was on again!’ 

‘I’m going out the day after tomorrow,’ Ellis said. ‘Isn’t that damned padre 
coming to hold his service this Sunday? I’ll take care not to be in for that, 
anyway. Bloody knee-drill.’ 

‘Next Sunday,’ said Westfield. ‘Promised to be in for it myself. So’s 
Macgregor. Bit hard on the poor devil of a padre, I must say. Only gets here 
once in six weeks. Might as well get up a congregation when he does come.’ 

‘Oh, hell! I’d snivel psalms to oblige the padre, but I' can’t stick the way 
these damned native Christians come shoving into our church. A pack of 
Madrassi servants and Karen school-teachers. And then those two yellow- 
bellies, Francis and Samuel-* they call themselves Christians too. Last time the 
padre was here they had the nerve to come up and sit on the front pews with the 
white men. Someone ought to speak to the padre about that. What bloody fools 
we were ever to let those missionaries loose in this country! Teaching bazaar 
sweepers they’re as good as we are. “Please, sir, me Christian same like 
master.” Damned cheek.’ 

‘How about that for a pair of legs?’ said Mr Lackersteen, passing La Vie 
Parisienne across. ‘You know French, Flory; what’s that mean underneath? 
Christ, it reminds me of when I was in Paris, my first leave, before I married. 



Burmese Days 87 

Christ, I wish I was there again' ’ 

‘Did you hear that one about “There was a young lady of Woking”?’ 
Maxwell said. He was rather a silent youth, but, like other youths, he had an 
affection for a good smutty rhyme. He completed the biography of the young 
lady of Woking, and there was a laugh. Westfield replied with the young lady 
of Ealing who had a peculiar feeling, and Flory came in with the young curate 
of Horsham who always took every precaution. There was more laughter. 
Even Ellis thawed and produced several rhymes, Ellis’s jokes were always 
genuinely witty, and yet filthy beyond measure. Everyone cheered up and felt 
more friendly in spite of the heat. They had finished the beer and were just 
going to call for another drink, when shoes creaked on the steps outside. A 
booming voice, which made the floorboards tingle, was saying jocosely: 

‘Yes, most distinctly humorous. I incorporated it in one of those little 
articles of mine in Blackwood's, you know. I remember, too, when I was 
stationed at Prome, another quite-ah-divertmg incident which-’ 

Evidently Mr Macgregor had arrived at the Club. Mr Lackersteen 
exclaimed, ‘Hell! My wife’s there,’ and pushed his empty glass as far away 
from him as it would go. Mr Macgregor and Mrs Lackersteen entered the 
lounge together. 

Mr Macgregor was a large, heavy man, rather past forty, with a kindly, 
puggy face, wearing gold-rimmed spectacles. His bulky shoulders, and a trick 
he had of thrusting his head forward, reminded one curiously of a turtle-the 
Burmans, in fact, nicknamed him ‘the tortoise’. He was dressed in a clean silk 
suit, which already showed patches of sweat beneath the armpits. He greeted 
the others with a humorous mock-salute, and then planted himself before the 
notice-board, beaming, in the attitude of a schoolmaster twiddling a cane 
behind his back. The good nature in his face was quite genuine, and yet there 
was such a wilful geniality about him, such a strenuous air of being off duty 
and forgetting his official rank, that no one was ever quite at ease in his 
presence. His conversation was evidently modelled on that of some facetious 
schoomaster or clergyman whom he had known in early life. Any long word, 
any quotation, any proverbial expression figured in his mind as a joke, and was 
introduced with a bumbling noise like ‘er’ or ‘ah’, to make it clear that there 
was a joke coming. Mrs Lackersteen was a woman of about thirty-five, 
handsome in a contourless, elongated way, like a fashion plate. She had a 
sighing, discontented voice. The others had all stood up when she entered, and 
Mrs Lackersteen sank exhaustedly into the best chair under the punkah, 
fanning herself with a slender hand like that of a newt. 

‘Oh dear, this heat, this heatl Mr Macgregor came and fetched me in his car. 
So kind of him. Tom, that wretch- of a rickshaw-man is pretending to be ill 
again. Really, I think you ought to give him a good thrashing and bring him to 
his senses. It’s too terrible to have to walk about in this sun every day.’ 

Mrs Lackersteen, unequal to the quarter-mile walk between her house and 
the Club; had imported a rickshaw from Rangoon. Except for bullock-carts 
and Mr Macgregor’s carat was the only wheeled vehicle in Kyauktada, for the 
whole district did not possess ten miles of road. In the jungle, rathe® than leave 



88 Burmese Days 

her husband alone, Mrs Lackersteen endured all the horrors of dripping tents, 
mosquitoes and tinned food; but she made up for it by complaining over trifles 
while in headquarters. 

‘Really I think the laziness of these servants is getting too shocking,’ she 
sighed. ‘Don’t you agree, Mr Macgregor? We seem to have no authority over 
the natives nowadays, with all these dreadful Reforms, and the insolence they 
learn from the newspapers. In some ways they are getting almost as bad as the 
lower classes at home.’ 

‘Oh, hardly as bad as that, I trust. Still, I am afraid there is no doubt that the 
democratic spirit is creeping in, even here.’ 

‘And such a short time ago, even just before the war, they were so nice and 
respectful! The way they salaamed when you passed them on the road-it was 
really quite charming. I remember when we paid our butler only twelve rupees 
a month, and really that man loved us like a dog. And now they are demanding 
forty and fifty rupees, and I find that the only way I can even keep a servant is to 
pay their wages several months in arrears.’ 

‘The old type of servant is disappearing,’ agreed Mr Macgregor. ‘In my 
young days, when one’s butler was disrespectful, one sent him along to the jail 
with a chit saying “Please give the bearer fifteen lashes”. Ah well, eheufugacesl 
Those days are gone for ever, I am afraid.’ 

‘Ah, you’re about right there,’ said Westfield in his gloomy way. ‘This 
country’ll never be fit to live in again. British Raj is finished if you ask me. Lost 
Dominion and all that. Time we cleared out of it.’ 

Whereat there was a murmur of agreement from everyone in the room, even 
from Flory, notoriously a Bolshie in his opinions, even from young Maxwell, 
who had been barely three years in the country. No Anglo-Indian will ever 
deny that India is going to the dogs, or ever has denied it-for India, like Punch, 
never was what it was. 

Ellis had meanwhile unpinned the offending notice from behind Mr 
Macgregor’ s back, and he now held it out to him, saying in his sour way: 
‘Here, Macgregor, we’ve read this notice, and we all think this idea of 
electing a native to the Club is absolute-’ Ellis was going to have said ‘absolute 
balls’, but he remembered Mrs Lackersteen’s presence and checked him- 
self- ‘is absolutely uncalled for. After all, this Club is a place where we come to 
enjoy ourselves, and we don’t want natives poking about in here. We like to 
think there’s still one place where we’re free of them. The others all agree with 
me absolutely.’ 

He looked round at the others. ‘Hear, hear!’ said Mr Lackersteen gruffly. He 
knew that his wife would guess that he had been drinking, and he felt that a 
display of sound sentiment would excuse him. 

Mr Macgregor took the notice with a smile. He saw the ‘B.F.’ pencilled 
against his name, and privately he thought Ellis’s manner very disrespectful, 
but he turned the matter off with a joke. He took as great pains to be a good 
fellow at the Club as he did to keep up his dignity during office hours. ‘I 
gather,’ he said, ‘that our friend Ellis does not wetteome the society of- ah- his 
Aryan brother?’ . * . 



Burmese Days 89 

‘No, I do not,’ said Ellis tartly. ‘Nor my Mongolian brother. I don’t like 
niggers, to put it in one word.’ 

Mr Macgregor stiffened at the word ‘nigger’, which is discountenanced in 
India. He had no prejudice against Orientals; indeed, he was deeply fond of 
them. Provided they were given no freedom he thought them the most 
charming people alive. It always pained him to see them wantonly insulted. 

‘Is it quite playing the game,’ he said stiffly, ‘to call these people niggers-a 
term they very naturally resent-when they are obviously nothing of the kind? 
The Burmese are Mongolians, the Indians are Aryans or Dravidians, and all of 
them are quite distinct-’ 

‘Oh, rot that!’ said Ellis, who was not at all awed by Mr Macgregor ’s official 
status. ‘Call them niggers or Aryans or what you like. What I’m saying is that 
we don’t want to see any black hides in this Club. If you put it to the vote you’ll 
find we’re against it to a man-unless Flory wants his dear pal Veraswami,’ he 
added. 

‘Hear, hear!’ repeated Mr Lackersteen. ‘Count on me to blackball the lot of 
’em.’ 

Mr Macgregor pursed his lips whimsically. He was in an awkward position, 
for the idea of electing a native member was not his own, but had been passed 
on to him by the Commissioner. However, he disliked making excuses, so he 
said in a more conciliatory tone: 

‘Shall we postpone discussing it till the next general meeting? In the 
meantime we can give it our mature consideration. And now,’ he added, 
moving towards the table, ‘who will join me in a little- ah- liquid 
refreshment?’ 

The butler was called and the ‘liquid refreshment’ ordered. It was hotter 
than ever now, and everyone was thirsty. Mr Lackersteen was on the point of 
ordering a drink when he caught his wife’s eye, shrank up and said sulkily 
‘No.’ He sat with his hands on his knees, with a rather pathetic expression, 
watching Mrs Lackersteen swallow a glass of lemonade with gin in it. Mr 
Macgregor, though he signed the chit for drinks, drank plain lemonade. Alone 
of the Europeans in Kyauktada, he kept the rule of not drinking before sunset. 

‘It’s all very well,’ grumbled Ellis, with his forearms on the table, fidgeting 
with his glass. The dispute with Mr Macgregor had made him restless again. 
‘It’s all very well, but I stick to what I said. No natives in this Club! It’s by 
constantly giving way over small things like that that we’ve ruined the Empire. 
The country’s only rotten with sedition because we’ve been too soft with them. 
The only possible policy is to treat ’em like the dirt they are. This is a critical 
moment, and we want every bit of prestige we can get. We’ve got to hang 
together and say, “We are the masters,' and you "beggars-” ’ Ellis pressed his 
small thumb down as though flattening a grub-* “you beggars keep your 
place!” ’ - ■ : 

‘Hopeless, did chap,’ said Westfield. ‘Quite hopeless. What can you do with 
all this red tape tying your hands?. Beggars of natives know the law better than 
we do. Insult you to your face and then run you in the moment yon Mt.’aaou 
Can’t do anyihing.usfess you put yew foot down firmly. And how can you, if 



po Burmese Days 

they haven’t the guts to show fight?’ 

‘Our burra sahib at Mandalay always said,’ put in Mrs Lackersteen, ‘that in 
the end we shall simply leave India. Young men will not come out here any 
longer to work all their lives for insults and ingratitude. We shall just^o. When 
the natives come to us begging us to stay, we shall say, “No, you have had your 
chance, you wouldn’t take it. Very well, we shall leave you to govern 
yourselves.” And then, what a lesson that will teach them!’ 

‘It’s all this law and order that’s done for us,’ said Westfield gloomily. The 
ruin of the Indian Empire through too much legality was a recurrent theme 
with Westfield. According to him, nothing save a full-sized rebellion, and the 
consequent reign of martial law, could save the Empire from decay. ‘All this 
paper-chewing and chit-passing. Office babus are the real rulers of this 
country now. Our number’s up. Best thing we can do is to shut up shop and let 
’em stew in their own ’juice.’ 

‘I don’t agree, I simply don’t agree,’ Ellis said. ‘We could put things right in 
a month if we chose. It only needs a pennyworth of pluck. Look at Amritsar. 
Look how they caved in after that. Dyer knew the stuff to give them. Poor old 
Dyer! That was a dirty job. Those cowards in England have got something to 
answer for.’ 

There was a.kind of sigh from the others, the same sigh that a gathering of 
Roman Catholics will give at the mention of Bloody Mary. Even Mr 
Macgregor, who detested bloodshed and martial law, shook his head at the 
name of Dyer. 

‘Ah, poor man! Sacrificed to the Paget M.P.s. Well, perhaps they will 
discover their mistake when it is too late.’ 

‘My old governor used to tell a story about that,’ said Westfield. ‘There was 
an old havildar in a native regiment-someone asked him what’d happen if the 
British left India. The old chap said-’ 

Flory pushed back his chair and stood up. It must not, it could not-no, it 
simply should not go on any longer! He must get out of this room quickly, 
before something happened inside his head and he began to smash the 
furniture and throw bottles at the pictures. Dull boozing witless porkers! Was 
it possible that they could go on week after week, year after year, repeating 
word for word the same evil-minded drivel, like a parody of a fifth-rate story in 
Blackwood's ? Would none of them ever think of anything new to say? Oh, what 
a place, what people! What a civilization is this of ours-this godless civilization 
founded on whisky, Blackwood's and the ‘Bonzo’ pictures! God have mercy on 
us, for all of us are part of it. 

Flory did not say any of this, and he was at some pains not to show it in his 
face. He was standing by his chair, a little sidelong to the others, with the half- 
smile of a man who is never sure of his popularity. 

‘I’m. afraid I shall have to be off,’ he said. ‘I’ve got some things to see to 
before breakfast, unfortunately.’ 

‘Stay and have another spot, old man,’ said Westfield. ‘Morning’s young. 
Have a gin. Give you an appetite.’ 

‘No, thanks, I must be going. Come on, Flo, Good-bye, Mrs Lackersteen. 



Burmese Days 


9i 


Good-bye, everybody.’ 

‘Exit Booker Washington, the niggers’ pal,’ said Ellis as Flory disappeared. 
Ellis could always be counted on to say something disagreeable about anyone 
who had just left the room. ‘Gone to see Very-slimy, I suppose. Or else sloped 
off to avoid paying a round of drinks.’ 

‘Oh, he’s not a bad chap,’ Westfield said. ‘Says some Bolshie things 
sometimes. Don’t suppose he means half of them.’ 

‘Oh, a very good fellow, of course,’ said Mr Macgregor. Every European in 
India is ex-officio, or rather ex-colore, a good fellow, until he has done 
something quite outrageous. It is an honorary rank. 

‘He’s a bit too Bolshie for my taste. I can’t bear a fellow who pals up with the 
natives. I shouldn’t wonder if he’s got a lick of the tar-brush himself. It might 
explain that black mark on his face. Piebald. And he looks like a yellow-belly, 
with that black hair, and skin the colour of a lemon.’ 

There was some desultory scandal about Flory, but not much, because Mr 
Macgregor did not like scandal. The Europeans stayed in the Club long 
enough for one more round of drinks. Mr Macgregor told his anecdote about 
Prome, which could be produced in almost any context. And then the 
conversation veered back to the old, never-palling subject-the insolence of the 
natives, the supineness of the Government, the dear dead days when the 
British Raj was the British Raj and please give the bearer fifteen lashes. This 
topic was never let alone for long, partly because of Ellis’s obsession. Besides, 
you could forgive the Europeans a great deal of their bitterness. Living and 
working among Orientals would try the temper of a saint. And all of them, the 
officials particularly, knew what it was to be baited and insulted. Almost every 
day, when Westfield or Mr Macgregor or even Maxwell went down the street, 
the High School boys, with their young, yellow faces-faces smooth as gold 
coins, full of that maddening contempt that sits so naturally on the Mongolian 
face-sneered at them as they went past, sometimes hooted after them with 
hyena-like laughter. The life of the Anglo-Indian officials is not all jam. In 
comfortless camps, in sweltering offices, in gloomy dakbungalows smelling of 
dust and earth-oil, they earn, perhaps, the right to be a little disagreeable. 

It was getting on for ten now, and hot beyond bearing. Flat, clear drops of 
sweat gathered on everyone’s face, and on the men’s bare forearms. A damp 
patch was growing larger and larger in the back of Mr Macgregor’s silk coat. 
The glare outside seemed to soak somehow through the green-chicked 
windows, making one’s eyes ache and filling one’s head with stuffiness. 
Everyone thought with malaise of his stodgy breakfast, and of the long, deadly 
hours that were coming. Mr Macgregor stood up with a sigh and adjusted his 
spectacles, which had slipped down his sweating nose. 

‘Alas that such a festive gathering should end,’ he said. ‘I must get home to 
breakfast. The cares of Empire. Is anybody coming my way? My mm is 
waiting with the car.’ 

‘Oh, thank you,’ said Mrs Lackersteen; ‘if you’d take Tom and me. What a 
relief not 00 have to walk in this head’ 

Thee*hm stood Westfisldi^^ his 


9 2 Burmese Days 

nose, ‘Better get a move on, I suppose Go to sleep if I sit here any longer. 
Think of stewing in that office all day! Baskets of papers. Oh Lord!’ 

‘Don’t forget tennis this evening, everyone,’ said Ellis. ‘Maxwell, you lazy 
devil, don’t you skulk out of it again. Down here with your racquet at four- 
thirty sharp.’ 

‘Apris vous 3 madame,’ said Mr Macgregor gallantly, at the door. 

‘Lead on, Macduff,’ said Westfield. 

They went out into the glaring white sunlight. The heat rolled from the 
earth like the breath of an oven. The flowers, oppressive to the eyes, blazed 
with not a petal stirring, in a debauch of sun. The glare sent a weariness 
through one’s bones. There was something horrible in it-horrible to think of 
that blue, blinding sky, stretching on and on over Burma and India, over Siam, 
Cambodia, China, cloudless and interminable. The plates of Mr Macgregor’s 
waiting car were too hot to touch. The evil time of day was beginning, the time, 
as the Burmese say, ‘when feet are silent’. Hardly a living creature stirred, 
except men, and the black columns of ants, stimulated by the heat, which 
marched ribbon-like across the path, and the tail-less vultures which soared on 
the currents of the air. 


3 


Flory turned to the left outside the Club gate and started down the bazaar 
road, under the shade of the peepul trees. A hundred yards away there was a 
swirl of music, where a squad of Military Policemen, lank Indians in greenish 
khaki, were marching back to their lines with a Gurkha boy playing the 
bagpipes ahead of them. Flory was going to see Dr Veraswami. The doctor’s 
house was a long bungalow of earth-oiled wood, standing on piles, with a large 
unkempt garden which adjoined that of the Club. The back of the house was 
towards the road, for it faced the hospital, which lay between it and the river. 

As Flory entered the compound there was a frightened squawk of women 
and a scurrying within the house. Evidently he had narrowly missed seeing the 
doctor’s wife. He went round to the front of the house and called up to the 
veranda: 

‘Doctor! Are you busy? May I come up?’ 

The doctor, a little black and white figure, popped from within the house 
like a jack-in-the-box. He hurried to the veranda rail, exclaimed effusively: 

‘If you may come up! Of course, of course, come up this instant! Ah, Mr 
Flory, how very delightful to see you! Come up, come up. What drink will you 
have? I have whisky, beer, vermouth and other European liquors. Ah, my dear 
friend, how I have been pining for some cultured conversation!’ 

The doctor was a small, black, plump man with fuzzy hair and round, 
credulous eyes. He wore steel-rimmed spectacles, and he was dressed in a 



Burmese Days 93 

badly fitting white drill suit, with trousers bagging concertina-like over clumsy 
black boots. His voice was eager and bubbling, with a hissing of the s’s. As 
Flory came up the steps the doctor popped back to the end of the veranda and 
rummaged in a big tin ice-chest, rapidly pulling out bottles of all descriptions. 
The veranda was wide and dark, with low eaves from which baskets of fern 
hung, making it seem like a cave behind a waterfall of sunlight. It was 
furnished with long, cane-bottomed chairs made in the jail, and at one end 
there was a book-case containing a rather unappetizing little library, mainly 
books of essays, of the Emerson-Carlyle-Stevenson type. The doctor, a great 
reader, liked his books to have what he called a ‘moral meaning’. 

‘Well, doctor,’ said Flory-the doctor had meanwhile thrust him into a long 
chair, pulled out the leg-rests so that he could lie down, and put cigarettes and 
beer within reach. ‘Well, doctor, and how are things? How’s the British 
Empire? Sick of the palsy as usual?’ 

‘Aha, Mr Flory, she iss very low, very low! Grave complications setting in. 
Septicaemia, peritonitis and paralysis of the ganglia. We shall have to call in 
the specialists, I fear. Aha!’ 

It was a joke between the two men to pretend that the British Empire was an 
aged female patient of the doctor’s. The doctor had enjoyed this joke for two 
years without growing tired of it. 

‘Ah, doctor,’ said Flory, supine in the long chair, ‘what a joy to be here after 
that bloody Club. When I come to your house I feel like a Nonconformist 
minister dodging up to town and going home with a tart. Such a glorious 
holiday from them 3 — he motioned with one heel in the direction of the 
Club-‘from my beloved fellow Empire-builders. British prestige, the white 
man’s burden, the pukka sahib sans peur et sans reproche - you know. Such a 
relief to be out of the stink of it for a little while.’ 

‘My friend, my friend, now come, come, please! That iss outrageous. You 
must not say such things of honourable English gentlemen!’ 

'You don’t have to listen to the honourable gentlemen talking, doctor. I 
stood it as long as I could this morning. Ellis with his “dirty nigger”, Westfield 
with his jokes, Macgregor with his Latin tags and please give the bearer fifteen 
lashes. But when they got on to that story about the old havildar-you know, 
the dear old havildar who said that if the British left India there wouldn’t be a 
rupee or a virgin between-you know; well, I couldn’t stand it any longer. It’s 
time that old havildar was put on the retired list. He’s been saying the same 
thing ever since the Jubilee in ’eighty-seven.’ 

The doctor grew agitated, as he always did when Flory criticized the Club 
members. He was standing with his plump white-clad behind balanced against 
the veranda rail, and sometimes gesticulating. When searching for a word he 
would nip his black thumb and forefinger together, as though to capture an 
idea floating in the air. 

‘But truly, truly, Mr Flory, you must not speak sot Why iss it that always 
you are abusing the pukka sahibs, ass you call them? They are the salt of the 
earth. Consider the great things they have done-consider the great 
administrators who have made British India what it iss. Consider dive, 



94 Burmese Days 

Warren Hastings, Dalhousie, Curzon. They were such men-I quote your 
immortal Shakespeare-ass, take them for all in all, we shall not look upon their 
like again!’ 

‘Well, do you want to look upon their like again? I don’t. 5 

‘And consider how noble a type iss the English gentleman! Their glorious 
loyalty to one another' The public school spirit! Even those of them whose 
manner iss unfortunate-some Englishmen are arrogant, I concede-have the 
great, sterling qualities that we Orientals lack. Beneath their rough exterior, 
their hearts are of gold.’ 

‘Of gilt, shall we say? There’s a kind of spurious good-fellowship between 
the English and this country. It’s a tradition to booze together and swap meals 
and pretend to be friends, though we all hate each other like poison. Hanging 
together, we call it. It’s a political necessity. Of course drink is what keeps the 
machine going. We should all go mad and kill one another in a week if it 
weren’t for that. There’s a subject for one of your uplift essayists, doctor. 
Booze as the cement of empire.’ 

The doctor shook his head. ‘Really, Mr Flory, I know not what it iss that 
hass made you so cynical. It iss so most unsuitable! You-an English gentleman 
of high gifts and character-to be uttering seditious opinions that are worthy of 
the Burmese PatriotV 

‘Seditious?’ Flory said. l Fm not seditious. I don’t want the Burmans to drive 
us out of this country. God forbid! I’m here to make money, like everyone else. 
All I object to is the slimy white man’s burden humbug. The pukka sahib pose. 
It’s so boring. Even those bloody fools at the Club might be better company if 
we weren’t all of us living a lie the whole time.’ 

‘But, my dear friend, what lie are you living?’ 

‘Why, of course, the lie that we’re here to uplift our poor black brothers 
instead of to rob them. I suppose it’s a natural enough lie. But it corrupts us, it 
corrupts us in ways you can’t imagine. There’s an everlasting sense of being a 
sneak and a liar that torments us and drives us to justify ourselves night and 
day. It’s at the bottom of half our beastliness to the natives. We Anglo-Indians 
could be almost bearable if we’d only admit that we’re thieves and go on 
thieving without any humbug.’ 

The doctor, very pleased, nipped his thumb and forefinger together. ‘The 
weakness of your argument, my dear friend,’ he said, beaming at his own 
irony, ‘the weakness appears to be, that you are not thieves.’ 

‘Now, my dear doctor-’ 

Flory sat up in the long chair, partly because his prickly heat had just 
stabbed him in the back like a thousand needles, partly because his favourite 
argument with the doctor was about to begin. This argument, vaguely political 
in nature, took place as often as the two men met. It was a topsy-turvy affair, 
for the Englishman was bitterly anti-English and the Indian fanatically loyal. 
Dr Veraswami had a passionate admiration for the English, which a thousand 
snubs from Englishmen had not shaken. He would maintain with positive 
eagerness that he, as an Indian, belonged to an inferior and degenerate race. 
His faith in British justice was so great that even when, at the jail, he had to 



Burmese Days pj 

superintend a flogging or a hanging, and would come home with his black face 
faded grey and dose himself with whisky, his zeal did not falter. Flory’s 
seditious opinions shocked him, but they also gave him a certain shuddering 
pleasure, such as a pious believer will take in hearing the Lord’s Prayer 
repeated backwards. 

‘My dear doctor,’ said Flory, ‘how can you make out that we are in this 
country for any purpose except to steal? It’s so simple. The official holds the 
Burman down while the businessman goes through his pockets. Do you 
suppose my firm, for instance, could get its timber contracts if the country 
weren’t in the hands of the British? Or the other timber firms, or the oil 
companies, or the miners and planters and traders? How could the Rice Ring 
go on skinning the unfortunate peasant if it hadn’t the Government behind it? 
The British Empire is simply a device for giving trade monopolies to the 
English-or rather to gangs of Jews and Scotchmen.’ 

‘My friend, it iss pathetic to me to hear you talk so. It iss truly pathetic. You 
say you are here to trade? Of course you are. Could the Burmese trade for 
themselves? Can they make machinery, ships, railways, roads? They are 
helpless without you. What would happen to the Burmese forests if the 
English were not here? They would be sold immediately to the Japanese, who 
would gut them and ruin them. Instead of which, in your hands, actually they 
are improved. And while your businessmen develop the resources of our 
country, your officials are civilizing us, elevating us to their level, from pure 
public spirit. It is a magnificent record of self-sacrifice.’ 

‘Bosh, my dear doctor. We teach the young men to drink whisky and play 
football, I admit, but precious little else. Look at our schools-factories for 
cheap clerks. We’ve never taught a single useful manual trade to the Indians. 
We daren’t; frightened of the competition in industry. We’ve even crushed 
various industries. Where are the Indian muslins now? Back in the forties or 
thereabouts they were building sea-going ships in India, and manning them as 
well. Now you couldn’t build a seaworthy fishing boat there. In the eighteenth 
century the Indians cast guns that were at any rate up to the European 
standard. Now, after we’ve been in India a hundred and fifty years, you can’t 
make so much as a brass cartridge-case in the whole continent. The only 
Eastern races that have developed at all quickly are the independent ones, I 
won’t instance Japan, but take the case of Siam-’ 

The doctor waved his hand excitedly. He always interrupted the argument 
at this point (for as a rule it followed the same course, almost word for word), 
finding that the case of Siam hampered him. 

‘My friend, my friend, you are forgetting the Oriental character. How iss it 
possible to have developed us, with our apathy and superstition? At least you 
have brought to us law and order. The unswerving British Justice and the Pax 
Britannica.’ 

‘Pox Britannica, doctor. Pox Britannica is its proper name. And in any case, 
whom is it pax for? The money-lender and the lawyer. Of course we keep the 
peace in India, in our own interest, but what does all this law and order 
business boil down to? More banks and more prisons- that’s all it means.’ 



9 6 Burmese Days 

‘What monstrous misrepresentations!’ cried the doctor. ‘Are not prissons 
necessary? And have you brought us nothing but prissons? Consider Burma in 
the days of Thibaw, with dirt and torture and ignorance, and then look around 
you. Look merely out of this veranda-look at that hospital, and over to the 
right at that school and that police station. Look at the whole uprush of 
modern progress!’ 

‘Of course I don’t deny,’ Flory said, ‘that we modernize this country in 
certain ways. We can’t help doing so. In fact, before we’ve finished we’ll have 
wrecked the whole Burmese national culture. But we’re not civilizing them, 
we’re only rubbing our dirt on to them. Where’s it going to lead, this uprush of 
modern progress, as you call it? Just to our own dear old swinery of 
gramophones and billycock hats. Sometimes I think that in two hundred years 
all this-’ he waved a foot towards the horizon-‘all this will be gone-forests, 
villages, monasteries, pagodas all vanished. And instead, pink villas fifty yards 
apart; all over those hills, as far as you can see, villa after villa, with all the 
gramophones playing the same tune. And all the forests shaved flat-cliewed 
into wood-pulp for the News of the World , or sawn up into gramophone cases. 
But the trees avenge themselves, as the old chap says in The Wild Duck . You’ve 
read Ibsen, of course?’ 

‘Ah, no, Mr Flory, alas! That mighty master-mind, your inspired Bernard 
Shaw hass called him. It iss a pleasure to come. But, my friend, what you do 
not see iss that your civilization at its very worst iss for us an advance. 
Gramophones, billycock hats, the News of the World-zW iss better than the 
horrible sloth of the Oriental. I see the British, even the least inspired of them, 
ass-ass-’ the doctor searched for a phrase, and found one that probably came 
from Stevenson— ‘ass torchbearers upon the path of progress.’ 

‘I don’t. I see them as a kind of up-to-date, hygienic, self-satisfied louse. 
Creeping round the world building prisons. They build a prison and call it 
progress,’ he added rather regretfully -for the doctor would not recognize the 
allusion. 

‘My friend, positively you are harping upon the subject of prissons! 
Consider that there are also other achievements of your countrymen. They 
construct roads, they irrigate deserts, they conquer famines, they build 
schools, they set up hospitals, they combat plague, cholera, leprosy, smallpox, 
venereal disease-’ 

‘Having brought it themselves,’ put in Flory. 

‘No, sir!’ returned the doctor, eager to claim this distinction for his own 
countrymen. ‘No, sir, it wass the Indians who introduced venereal disease into 
this country. The Indians introduce diseases, and the English cure them. 
There iss the answer to all your pessimism and seditiousness.’ 

‘Well, doctor, we shall never agree. The fact is that you like all this modern 
progress business, whereas I’d rather see things a little bit septic. Burma in the 
days of Thibaw would have suited me better, I think. And as I said before, if 
we are a civilizing influence, it’s only to grab on a larger scale. We should chuck 
it quickly enough if it didn’t pay.’ 

‘My friend, you do not think that. If truly you disapprove of the British 



Burmese Days 97 ^ 

Empire, you would not be talking of it privately here. You would be 
proclaiming from the house-tops. I know your character, Mr Flory, better 
than you know it yourself.’ 

‘Sorry, doctor; I don’t go in for proclaiming from the housetops. I haven’t 
the guts. I “counsel ignoble ease”, like old Belial in Paradise Lost. It’s safer. 
You’ve got to be a pukka sahib or die, in this country. In fifteen years I’ve 
never talked honestly to anyone except you. My talks here are a safety-valve; a 
little Black Mass on the sly, if you understand me.’ 

At this moment there was a desolate wailing noise outside. Old Mattu„the 
Hindu durwan who looked after the European church, was standing in the 
sunlight below the veranda. He was an old fever-stricken creature; more like a 
grasshopper than a human being, and dressed in a few square inches of dingy 
rag. He lived near the church in a hut made of flattened kerosene tins, from 
which he would sometimes hurry forth set the appearance of a European, to 
salaam deeply and wail something about his ‘talab’, which was eighteen rupees 
a month. Looking piteously up at the veranda, he massaged the earth-coloured 
skin of his belly with one hand, and with the other made the motion of putting 
food into his mouth. The doctor felt in his pocket and dropped a four-anna 
piece over the veranda rail. He was notorious for his soft-heartedness, and all 
the beggars in Kyauktada made him their target. 

‘Behold there the degeneracy of the East,’ said the doctor, pointing to 
Mattu, who was doubling himself up like a caterpillar and uttering grateful 
whines. ‘Look at the wretchedness of hiss limbs. The calves of hiss legs are not 
so thick 1 ass an Englishman’s wrists. Look at hiss abjectness and servility. Look 
at hiss ignorance- such ignorance ass iss not known in Europe outside a home 
for mental defectives. Once I asked Mattu to tell me hiss age. “Sahib,” he said, 
“I believe that I am ten years old.” How can you pretend, Mr Flory, that you 
are not the natural superior of such creatures?’ 

‘Poor old Mattu, the uprush of modern progress seems to have missed him 
somehow,’ Flory said, throwing another four-anna piece over the rail. ‘Go on, 
Mattu, spend that on booze. Be as degenerate as you can. It all postpones 
Utopia.’ 

‘Aha, Mr Flory, sometimes I think that all you say iss but to-what iss the 
expression?-pull my leg. The English sense of humour. We Orientals have no 
humour, ass iss well known.’ 

‘Lucky devils. It’s been the ruin of us, our bloody sense of humour.’ He 
yawned with his hands behind his head. Mattu had shambled away after 
further grateful noises. ‘I suppose I ought to be going before this cursed sun 
gets too high. The heat’s going to be devilish this year, I feel it in my bones. 
Well, doctor, we’ve been arguing so much that I haven’t asked for your news. I 
only got in from the jungle yesterday. I ought to go back the day after 
tomorrow-don’t know whether I shall. Has anything been happening in 
Kyauktada? Any scandals?’ 

The doctor looked suddenly serious. He had taken off his spectacles, and his 
face, with dark liquid eyes, recalled that of a black retriever dog. He looked 
away, and spoke in a slightly more hesitant tone than before. 



p8 Burmese Days 

‘That fact iss, my friend, there iss a most unpleasant business afoot. You will 
perhaps laugh-it sounds nothing-but I am in serious trouble. Or rather, I am 
in danger of trouble. It iss an underground business. You Europeans will 
never hear of it directly. In this place’-he waved a hand towards the 
bazaar-‘there iss perpetual conspiracies and plottings of which you do not 
hear. But to us they mean much.’ 

‘What’s been happening, then?’ 

‘It iss this. An intrigue iss brewing against me. A most serious intrigue 
which iss intended to blacken my character and ruin my official career. Ass an 
Englishman you will not understand these things. I have incurred the enmity 
of a man you probably do not know, U Po Kyin, the Sub-divisional 
Magistrate. He iss a most dangerous man. The damage that he can do to me iss 
incalculable.’ 

‘U Po Kyin? Which one is that?’ 

‘The great fat man with many teeth. Hiss house iss down the road there, a 
hundred yards away.’ 

‘Oh, that fat scoundrel? I know him well.’ 

‘No, no, my friend, no, no!’ exclaimed the doctor quite eagerly; ‘it cannot be 
that you know him. Only an Oriental could know him. You, an English 
gentleman, cannot sink your mind to the depth of such ass U Po Kyin. He iss 
more than a scoundrel, he iss-what shall I say? Words fail me. He recalls to me 
a crocodile in human shape. He hass the cunning of the crocodile, its cruelty, 
its bestiality. If you knew the record of that man! The outrages he hass 
committed! The extortions, the briberies! The girls he hass ruined, raping 
them before the very eyes of their mothers! Ah, an English gentleman cannot 
imagine such a character. And thiss iss the man who hass taken hiss oath to 
ruin me.’ 

‘I’ve heard a good deal about U Po Kyin from various sources,’ Flory said, 
‘He seems a fair sample of a Burmese magistrate. A Burman told me that 
during the war U Po Kyin was at work recruiting, and he raised a battalion 
from his own illegitimate sons. Is that true?’ 

‘It could hardly be so,’ said the doctor, ‘for they would not have been old 
enough. But of hiss villainy there iss no doubt. And now he iss determined 
upon ruining me. In the first place he hates me because I know too much about 
him; and besides, he iss the enemy of any reasonably honest man. He will 
proceed-such iss the practice of such men— by calumny. He will spread reports 
about me-reports of the most appalling and untrue descriptions. Already he 
iss beginning them.’ 

‘But would anyone believe a fellow like that against you? He’s only a low- 
down magistrate. You’re a high official.’ 

‘Ah, Mr Flory, you do not understand Oriental cunning. U Po Kyin hass 
mined higher officials than I. He will know ways to make himself believed. 
And therefore-ah, it iss a difficult business!’ 

The doctor took a step or two up and down the veranda, polishing his glasses 
with his handkerchief. It was clear that there was something more which 
delicacy prevented him from saying. For a moment his manner was so troubled 



Burmese Days 99 

that Flory would have liked to ask whether he could not help in some way., but 
he did not, for he knew the uselessness of interfering in Oriental quarrels. No 
European ever gets to the bottom of these quarrels; there is always something 
impervious to the European mind, a conspiracy behind the conspiracy, a plot 
within the plot. Besides, to keep out of ‘native 5 quarrels is one of the Ten 
Precepts of the pukka sahib. He said doubtfully: 

‘What is a difficult business? 5 

‘It iss, if only-ah, my friend, you will laugh at me, I fear. But it iss this: if 
only I were a member of your European Club! If only! How different would 
my position be! 5 

‘The Club? Why? How would that help you? 5 

‘My friend, in these matters prestige iss everything. It iss not that U Po 
Kyin will attack me openly; he would never dare; it iss that he will libel me and 
backbite me. And whether he iss believed or not depends entirely upon my 
standing with the Europeans. It iss so that things happen in India. If our 
prestige iss good, we rise; if bad, we fall. A nod and a wink will accomplish 
more than a thousand official reports. And you do not know what prestige it 
gives to an Indian to be a member of the European Club. In the Club, 
practically he iss a European. No calumny can touch him. A Club member iss 
sacrosanct. 5 

Flory looked away over the veranda rail. He had got up as though to go. It 
always made him ashamed and uncomfortable when it had to be admitted 
between them that the doctor, because of his black skin, could not be received 
in the Club. It is a disagreeable thing when one’s close friend is not one’s social 
equal; but it is a thing native to the very air of India. 

‘They might elect you at the next general meeting, 5 he said. ‘I don’t say they 
will, but it’s not impossible. 5 

‘I trust, Mr Flory, that you do not think I am asking you to propose me for 
the Club? Heaven forbid! I know that that iss impossible for you. Simply I 
wass remarking that if I were a member of the Club, I should be forthwith 
invulnerable- 5 

Flory cocked his Terai hat loosely on his head and stirred Flo up with his 
stick. She was asleep under the chair. Flory felt very uncomfortable. He knew 
that in all probability, if he had the courage to face a few rows with Ellis, he 
could secure Dr Veras wami’s election to the Club. And the doctor, after all, 
was his friend, indeed, almost the sole friend he had in Burma. They had 
talked and argued together a hundred times, the doctor had dined at his house, 
he had even proposed to introduce Flory to his wife-but she, a pious Hindu, 
had refused with horror. They had made shooting trips together-the doctor, 
equipped with bandoliers and hunting knives, panting up hillsides slippery 
with bamboo leaves and blazing his gun at nothing. In common decency it was 
his duty to support the doctor. But he knew also that the doctor would never ask 
for any support, aid that there would be an ugly row before an Oriental was got 
into the Qub. No, he could not face that row! It was not worth it. He said: 

‘To .tell you the truth, there’s been talk about this already. They were 
discussing it this morning, and that little beast Ellis was peaching Ids usual 


ioo Burmese Days 

“dirty nigger” sermon. Macgregor has suggested electing one native member. 
He’s had orders to do so, I imagine.’ 

‘Yes, I heard that. We hear all these things. It wass that that put the idea into 
my head.’ 

‘It’s to come up at the general meeting in June. I don’t know what’ll 
happen-it depends on Macgregor, I think. I’ll give you my vote, but I can’t do 
more than that. I’m sorry, but I simply can’t. You don’t know the row there’ll 
be. Very likely they will elect you, but they’ll do it as an unpleasant duty, under 
protest. They’ve made a perfect fetish of keeping this Club all-white, as they 
call it.’ 

‘Of course, of course, my friend! I understand perfectly. Heaven forbid that 
you should get into trouble with your European friends on my behalf. Please, 
please, never to embroil yourself! The mere fact that you are known to be my 
friend benefits me more than you can imagine. Prestige, Mr Flory, iss like a 
barometer. Every time you are seen to enter my house the mercury rises half a 
degree.’ 

‘Well, we must try and keep it at “Set Fair”. That’s about all I can do for 
you, I’m afraid.’ 

‘Even that iss much, my friend. And for that, there iss another thing of 
which I would warn you, though you will laugh, I fear. It iss that you yourself 
should beware of U Po Kyin. Beware of the crocodile! For sure he will strike at 
you when he knows that you are befriending me.’ 

‘All right, doctor, I’ll beware of the crocodile. I don’t fancy he can do me 
much harm, though.’ 

‘At least he will try. I know him. It will be hiss policy to detach my friends 
from me. Possibly he would even dare to spread hiss libels about you also.’ 
‘About me? Good gracious, no one would believe anything against me. Civis 
Romanus sum. I’m an Englishman-quite above suspicion.’ 

‘Nevertheless, beware of hiss calumnies, my friend. Do not underrate him. 
He will know how to strike at you. He iss a crocodile. And like the crocodile’- 
the doctor nipped his thumb and finger impressively; his images became 
mixed sometimes —‘like the crocodile, he strikes always at the weakest spot!’ 
‘Do crocodiles always strike at the weakest spot, doctor?’ 

Both men laughed. They were intimate enough to laugh over the doctor’s 
queer English occasionally. Perhaps, at the bottom of his heart, the doctor was 
a little disappointed that Flory had not promised to propose him for the Club, 
but he would have perished rather than say so. And Flory was glad to drop the 
subject, an uncomfortable one which he wished had never been raised. 

‘Well, I really must be going, doctor. Good-bye in case I don’t see you again. 
I hope it’ll be all right at the general meeting. Macgregor’ s not a bad old stick. I 
dare say he’ll insist on their electing you.’ 

‘Let us hope so, my friend. With that l can defy a hundred U Po Kyins. A 
thousand! Good-bye, my friend, good-bye.’ 

Then Flory settled his Terai hat on his head and went home across the 
glaring maidan, to his breakfast, for which the long morning of drinking, 
smoking and talking had left him no appetite. 



4 


Flory lay asleep, naked except for black Shan trousers, upon his sweat-damp 
bed. He had been idling all day. He spent approximately three weeks of every 
month in camp, coming into Kyauktada for a few days at a time, chiefly in 
order to idle, for he had very little clerical work to do. 

The bedroom was a large square room with white plaster walls, open 
dooTways and no ceiling, but only rafters in which sparrows nested. There was 
no furniture except the big four-poster bed, with its furled mosquito net like a 
canopy, and a wicker table and chair and a small mirror; also some rough book- 
shelves, containing several hundred books, all mildewed by many rainy 
seasons and riddled by silver fish. A tuktoo clung to the wall, flat and 
motionless like a heraldic dragon. Beyond the veranda eaves the light rained 
down like glistening white oil. Some doves in a bamboo thicket kept up a dull 
droning noise, curiously appropriate to the heat-a sleepy sound, but with the 
sleepiness of chloroform rather than a lullaby. 

Down at Mr Macgregor’s bungalow, two hundred yards away, a durwan, 
like a living clock, hammered four strokes on a section of iron rail. Ko S’la, 
Flory’s servant, awakened by the sound, went into the cookhouse, blew up the 
embers of the woodfire and boiled the kettle for tea. Then he put on his pink 
gaungbaung and muslin ingyi and brought the tea-tray to his master’s bedside. 

Ko S’la (his real name was Maung San Hla; Ko S’la was an abbreviation) 
was a short, square- shouldered, rustic-looking Burman with a very dark skin 
and a harassed expression. He wore a black moustache which curved 
downwards round his mouth, but like most Burmans he was quite beardless. 
He had been Flory’s servant since his first day in Burma. The two men were 
within a month of one another’s age. They had been boys together, had 
tramped side by side after snipe and duck, sat together in machans waiting for 
tigers that never came, shared the discomforts of a thousand camps and 
marches; and Ko S’la had pimped for Flory and borrowed money for him from 
the Chinese money-lenders, carried him to bed when he was drunk, tended 
him through bouts of fever. In Ko S’la’s eyes Flory, because a bachelor, was a 
boy still; whereas Ko S’la had married, begotten five children, married again 
and become one of the -obscure martyrs of bigamy. Like all bachelors’ servants, 
Ko S’la was lazy and dirty > and yet he was devoted to Flory. He would never let 
anyone else serve Flory at table, or carry his gun or hold his pony’s head while 
he mounted. Chi the march, if they came to a stream, he would carry Flory 
across on his back. He was inclined to pity Flory, partly because he thought 



102 Burmese Days 

him childish and easily deceived, and partly because of the birthmark, which 
he considered a dreadful thing. 

Ko S’la put the tea-tray down on the table very quietly, and then went round 
to the end of the bed and tickled Flory’s toes. He knew by experience that this 
was the only way of waking Flory without putting him in a bad temper. Flory 
rolled over, swore, and pressed his forehead into the pillow. 

‘Four o’clock has struck, most holy god,’ Ko S’la said. ‘I have brought two 
teacups, because the woman said that she was coming.’ 

The woman was Ma Hla May, Flory’s mistress. Ko S’la always called her the 
woman , to show his disapproval-not that he disapproved of Flory for keeping a 
mistress, but he was jealous of Ma Hla May’s influence in the house. 

‘Will the holy one play tinms this evening?’ Ko S’la asked. 

‘No, it’s too hot,’ said Flory in English. ‘I don’t want anything to eat. Take 
this muck away and bring some whisky.’ 

Ko S’la understood English very well, though he could not speak it. He 
brought a bottle of whisky, and also Flory’s tennis racquet, which he laid in a 
meaning manner against the wall opposite the bed. Tennis, according to his 
notions, was a mysterious ritual incumbent on all Englishmen, and he did not 
like to see his master idling in the evenings. 

Flory pushed away in disgust the toast and butter that Ko S’la had brought, 
but he mixed some whisky in a cup of tea and felt better after drinking it. He 
had slept since noon, and his head and all his bones ached, and there was a taste 
like burnt paper in his mouth. It was years since he had enjoyed a meal. All 
European food in Burma is more or less disgusting-the bread is spongy stuff 
leavened with palm-toddy and tasting like a penny bun gone wrong, the butter 
comes out of a tin, and so does the milk, unless it is the grey watery catlap of the 
dudh-wallah. As Ko S’la left the room there was a scraping of sandals outside, 
and a Burmese girl’s high-pitched voice said, ‘Is my master awake?’ 

‘Come in,’ said Flory rather bad temperedly. 

Ma Hla May came in, kicking off red-lacquered sandals in the doorway. She 
was allowed to come to tea, as a special privilege, but not to other meals, nor to 
wear her sandals in her master’s presence. 

Ma Hla May was a woman of twenty-two or -three, and perhaps five feet tall. 
She was dressed in a longyi of pale blue embroidered Chinese satin, and a 
starched white muslin ingyi on which several gold lockets hung. Her hair was 
coiled in a tight black cylinder like ebony, and decorated with jasmine flowers. 
Her tiny, straight, slender body was a contourless as a bas-relief carved upon a 
tree. She was like a doll, with her oval, still face the colour of new copper, and 
her narrow eyes; an outlandish doll and yet a grotesquely beautiful one. A 
scent of sandalwood and coco-nut oil came into the room with her. 

Ma Hla May came across to the bed, sat down on the edge and put her arms 
rather abruptly round Flory. She smelled at his cheek with her flat nose, in the 
Burmese fashion. 

‘Why did my master not send for me this afternoon?’ she said. 

‘I was sleeping. It is too hot for that kind of thing.’ 

‘So you would rather sleep alone than with Ma Hla May? How ugly you 



Burmese Days •- 103 

must think me, then! Am I ugly, master?’ 

‘Go away,’ he said, pushing her back. ‘I don’t want you at this time of day. 5 

‘At least touch me with your lips, then. (There is no Burmese word for to 
kiss.) All white men do that to their women.’ 

‘There you are, then. Now leave me alone. Fetch some cigarettes and give 
me one.’ 

‘Why is it that nowadays you never want to make love to me? Ah, two years 
ago it was so different! You loved me in those days. You gave me presents of 
gold bangles and silk longyis from Mandalay. And now look’-Ma Hla May 
held out one tiny muslin-clad arm-‘not a single bangle. Last month I had 
thirty, and now all of them are pawned. How can I go to the bazaar without my 
bangles, and wearing the same longyi over and over again? I am ashamed 
before the other women.’ 

‘Is it my fault if you pawn your bangles?’ 

‘Two years ago you would have redeemed them for me. Ah, you do not love 
Ma Hla May any longer! 5 

She put her arms round him again and kissed him, a European habit which 
he had taught her. A mingled scent of sandalwood, garlic, coco-nut oil and the 
jasmine in her hair floated from her. It was a scent that always made his teeth 
tingle. Rather abstractedly he pressed her head back upon the pillow and 
looked down at her queer, youthful face, with its high cheekbones, stretched 
eyelids and short, shapely lips. She had rather nice teeth, like the teeth of a 
kitten. He had bought her from her parents two years ago, for three hundred 
rupees. He began to stroke her brown throat, rising like a smooth, slender stalk 
from the collarless ingyi. 

‘You only like me because I am a white man and have money,’ he said. 

‘Master, I love you, I love you more than anything in the world. Why do you 
say that? Have I not always been faithful to you?’ 

‘You have a Burmese lover.' 

‘Ugh! 5 Ma Hla May affected to shudder at the thought. ‘To think of their 
horrible brown hands, touching me! I should die if a Burman touched me! 5 

‘Liar.’ 

He put his hand on her breast. Privately, Ma Hla May did not like this, for it 
reminded her that her breasts existed-the ideal of a Burmese woman being to 
have no breasts. She lay and let him do as he wished with her, quite passive yet 
pleased and faintly smiling, like a cat which allows one to stroke it. Flory’s 
embraces meant nothing to her (Ba Pe, Ko S’la’s younger brother, was secretly 
her lover), yet she was bitterly hurt when he neglected them. Sometimes she 
had even put love-philtres in his food. It was the idle concubine’s life that she 
loved, and the visits to her village dressed in all her finery, when she could 
boast of her position as a ‘bo-kadaw’-a white man’s wife; for she had 
persuaded everyone, herself included, that she was Flory’s legal wife. 

When Fiory had done with her he turned away, jaded and ashamed, and lay 
silent with his left hand covering his birthmark. He always remembered the 
birthmark when he had done something to be ashamed of. He buried his face 
(hsgustedly in the pillow, which was damp and smelt of coco-nut oil. It was 



104 Burmese Days 

horribly hot, and the doves outside were still droning. Ma Hla May, naked, 
reclined beside Flory, fanning him gently with a wicker fan she had taken from 
the table. 

Presently she got up and dressed herself, and lighted a cigarette. Then, 
coming back to the bed, she sat down and began stroking Flory’ s bare 
shoulder. The whiteness of his skin had a fascination for her, because of its 
strangeness and the sense of power it gave her. But Flory twitched his shoulder 
to shake her hand away. At these times she was nauseating and dreadful to him. 
His sole wish was to get her out of his sight. 

‘Get out,’ he said. 

Ma Hla May took her cigarette from her mouth and tried to offer it to Flory. 
‘Why is master always so angry with me when he has made love to me?’ she 
said. 

‘Get out,’ he repeated 

Ma Hla May continued to stroke Flory’s shoulder. She had never learned 
the wisdom of leaving him alone at these times. She believed that lechery was a 
form of witchcraft, giving a woman magical powers over a man, until in the end 
she could weaken him to a half-idiotic slave. Each successive embrace sapped 
Flory’s will and made the spell stronger-this was her belief. She began 
tormenting him to begin over again. She laid down her cigarette and put her 
arms round him, trying to turn him towards her and kiss his averted face, 
reproaching him for his coldness. 

‘Go away, go away!’ he said angrily. ‘Look in the pocket of my shorts. There 
is money there. Take five rupees and go.’ 

Ma Hla May found the five-rupee note and stuffed it into the bosom of her 
ingyi, but she still would not go. She hovered about the bed, worrying Flory 
until at last he grew angry and jumped up. 

‘Get out of this room! I told you to go. I don’t want you in here after I’ve 
done with you.’ 

‘That is a nice way to speak to me! You treat me as though I were a 
prostitute.’ 

‘So you are. Out you go,’ he said, pushing her out of the room by her 
shoulders. He kicked her sandals after her. Their encounters often ended in 
this way. 

Flory stood in the middle of the room, yawning. Should he go down to the 
Club for tennis after all? No, it meant shaving, and he could not face the effort 
of shaving until he had a few drinks inside him. He felt his scrubby chin and 
lounged across to the mirror to examine it, but then turned away. He did not 
want to see the yellow, sunken face that would look back at him. For several 
minutes he stood slack-limbed, watching the tuktoo stalk a moth above the 
bookshelves. The cigarette that Ma Hla May had dropped burned down with 
an acrid smell, browning the paper. Flory took a book from the shelves, opened 
it and then threw it away in distaste. He had not even the energy to read. Oh 
God, God, what to do with the rest erf - this bloody evening? 

Flo waddled into the room, wagging hex tail and asking to be taken for a 
walk. Flory went sulkily into the little stone-floored bathroom that gave on to 



Burmese Days 10$ 

the bedroom, splashed himself with lukewarm water and put on his shirt and 
shorts. He must take some kind of exercise before the sun went down. In India 
it is in some way evil to spend a day without being once in a muck-sweat. It 
gives one a deeper sense of sin than a thousand lecheries. In the dark evening, 
after a quite idle day, one’s ennui reaches a pitch that is frantic, suicidal. Work, 
prayer, books, drinking, talking-they are all powerless against it; it can only be 
sweated out through the pores of the skin. 

Flory went out and followed the road uphill into the jungle. It was scrub 
jungle at first, with dense stunted bushes, and the only trees were half-wild 
mangoes, bearing little turpentiny fruits the size of plums. Then the road 
struck among taller trees. The jungle was dried-up and lifeless at this time of 
year. The trees lined the road in close, dusty ranks, with leaves a dull olive- 
green. No birds were visible except some ragged brown creatures like 
disreputable thrushes, which hopped clumsily under the bushes; in the 
distance some other bird uttered a cry of ‘Ah ha ha! Ah ha ha! ’-a lonely, hollow 
sound like the echo of a laugh. There was a poisonous, ivy-like smell of 
crushed leaves. It was still hot, though the sun was losing its glare and the 
slanting light was yellow. 

After two miles the road ended at the ford of a shallow stream. The jungle 
grew greener here, because of the water, and the trees were taller. At the edge 
of the stream there was a huge dead pyinkado tree festooned with spidery 
orchids, and there were some wild lime bushes with white waxen flowers. 
They had a sharp scent like bergamot. Flory had walked fast and the sweat had 
drenched his shirt and dribbled, stinging, into his eyes. He had sweated 
himself into a better mood. Also, the sight of this stream always heartened him; 
its water was quite clear, rarest of sights in a miry country. He crossed the 
stream by the stepping stones, Flo splashing after him, and turned into a 
narrow track he knew, which led through the bushes. It was a track that cattle 
had made, coming to the stream to drink, and few human beings ever followed 
it. It led to a pool fifty yards upstream. Here a peepul tree grew, a great 
buttressed thing six feet thick, woven of innumerable strands of wood, like a 
wooden cable twisted by a giant. The roots of the tree made a natural cavern, 
under which the clear greenish water bubbled. Above and all around dense 
foliage shut out the light, turning the place into a green grotto walled with 
leaves. 

Flory threw off his clothes and stepped into the water. It was a shade cooler 
than the air, and it came up to his neck when he sat down. Shoals of silvery 
mahseer 3 no bigger than sardines, came nosing and nibbling at his body. Flo 
had also flopped into the water, and she swam round silently, otter-like, with 
her webbed feet. She knew the pool well, for they often came here when Flory 
was at Kyauktada. 

There was a stirring high up in the peepul tree, and a bubbling noise like 
pots boiling. A flock of great pigeons were up there, eating the berries. Flory 
gazed up into the great green dome of the tree, trying to distinguish the birds; 
they ware invisible, they matched the leaves so perfectly, and yet the whole 
tree was abvewitb them, shimmering, as though the ghosts of birds were 



106 Burmese Days 

shaking it. Flo rested herself against the roots and growled up at the invisible 
creatures. Then a single green pigeon fluttered down and perched on a lower 
branch. It did not know that it was being watched. It was a tender thing, 
smaller than a tame dove, with jade-green back as smooth as velvet, and neck 
and breast of iridescent colours. Its legs were like the pink wax that dentists 
use. 

The pigeon rocked itself backwards and forwards on the bough, swelling out 
its breast feathers and laying its coralline beak upon them. A pang went 
through Flory. Alone, alone, the bitterness of being alone! So often like this, in 
lonely places in the forest, he would come upon something-bird, flower, 
tree-beautiful beyond all words, if there had been a soul with whom to share 
it. Beauty is meaningless until it is shared. If he had one person, just one, to 
halve his loneliness! Suddenly the pigeon saw the man and dog below, sprang 
into the air and dashed away swift as a bullet, with a rattle of wings. One does 
not often see green pigeons so closely when they are alive. They are high- 
flying birds, living in the treetops, and they do not come to the ground, or only 
to drink. When one shoots them, if they are not killed outright, they cling to 
the branch until they die, and drop long after one has given up waiting and 
gone away. 

Flory got out of the water, put on his clothes and recrossed the stream. He 
did not go home by the road, but followed a foot-track southward into the 
jungle, intending to make a detour and pass through a village that lay in the 
fringe of the jungle not far from his house. Flo frisked in and out of the 
undergrowth, yelping sometimes when her long ears caught in the thorns. She 
had once turned up a hare near here. Flory walked slowly The smoke of his 
pipe floated straight upwards in still plumes. He was happy and at peace after 
the walk and the clear water. It was cooler now, except for patches of heat 
lingering under the thicker trees, and the light was gentle. Bullock-cart wheels 
were screaming peacefully in the distance. 

Soon they had lost their way in the jungle, and were wandering in a maze of 
dead trees and tangled bushes. They came to an impasse where the path was 
blocked by large ugly plants like magnified aspidistras, whose leaves 
terminated in long lashes armed with thorns. A firefly glowed greenish at the 
bottom of a bush; it was getting twilight in the thicker places. Presently the 
bullock-cart wheels screamed nearer, taking a parallel course. 

‘Hey, sayagyi, saya gyiV Flory shouted, taking Flo by the collar to prevent 
her running away. 

l Ba le-de ?* the Burman shouted back. There was the sound of plunging 
hooves and of yells to the bullocks. 

‘Come here, if you please, O venerable and learned sir! We have lost our 
way. Stop a moment, O great builder of pagodas!’ 

The Burman left his cart and pushed through the jungle, slicing the creepers 
with his dah. He was a squat middle-aged man with one eye. He led the way 
back to the track, and Flory climbed on to the flat, uncomfortable bullock cart. 
The Burman took up the string reins, yelled to the bullocks, prodded the roots 
of their tails with his short stick, and the cart jolted on with a shriek of wheels. 



Burmese Days ioj 

The Burmese bullock-cart drivers seldom grease their axles, probably because 
they believe that the screaming keeps away evil spirits, though when 
questioned they will say that it is because they are too poor to buy grease. 

They passed a whitewashed wooden pagoda, no taller than a man and half 
hidden by the tendrils of creeping plants. Then the track wound into the 
village, which consisted of twenty ruinous wooden huts roofed with thatch, 
and a well beneath some barren date-palms. The egrets that roosted in the 
palms were streaming homewards over the treetops like white flights of 
arrows. A fat yellow woman with her longyi hitched under her armpits was 
chasing a dog round a hut, smacking at it with a bamboo and laughing, and the 
dog was also laughing in its fashion. The village was called Nyaunglebin-‘the 
four peepul trees’; there were no peepul trees there now, probably they had 
been cut down and forgotten a century ago. The villagers cultivated a narrow 
strip of fields that lay between the town and the jungle, and they also made 
bullock carts which they sold in Kyauktada. Bullock-cart wheels were littered 
everywhere under the houses; massive things five feet across, with spokes 
roughly but strongly carved. 

Flory got off the cart and gave the driver a present of four annas. Some 
brindled curs hurried from beneath the houses to sniff at Flo, and a flock of 
pot-bellied, naked children, with their hair tied in top-knots, also appeared, 
curious about the white man but keeping their distance. The village headman, 
a wizened, leaf-brown old man, came out of his house, and there were 
shikoings. Flory sat down on the steps of the headman’s house and relighted 
his pipe. He was thirsty. 

‘Is the water in your well good to drink, thugyi-min ?’ 

The headman reflected, scratching the calf of his left leg with his right big 
toenail. ‘Those who drink it, drink it, thakin. And those who do not drink it, do 
not drink it.’ 

‘Ah. That is wisdom.’ 

The fat woman who had chased the pariah brought a blackened earthenware 
teapot and a handleless bowl, and gave Flory some pale green tea, tasting of 
wood-smoke. 

‘I must be going, thugyi-min. Thank you for the tea.’ 

‘God go with you, thakin. ’ 

Flory went home by a path that led out on to the maidan. It was dark now. 
Ko S’la had put on a clean ingyi and was waiting in the bedroom. He had 
heated two kerosene tins of bath-water, lighted the petrol lamps and laid out a 
clean suit and shirt for Flory. The clean clothes were intended as a hint that 
Flory should shave, dress himself and go down to the Club after dinner. 
Occasionally he spent the evening in Shan trousers, loafing in a chair with a 
book, and Ko S’la disapproved of this habit. He hated to see his master 
behaving differently from other white men. The fact that Flory often came 
back from the Chib drunk, whereas he remained sober when he stayed at 
home, did not alter Ko S’la’s opinion, because getting drunk was normal and 
pardonable 'm a white man. 

‘The woman has gone down to the bazaar,’ he announced, pleased, as he 



i o 8 Burmese Days 

always was when Ma Hla May left the house. ‘Ba Pe has gone with a lantern, to 
look after her when she comes back.’ 

‘Good,’ Flory said. 

She had gone to spend her five rupees-gambling, no doubt. 

‘The holy one’s bath-water is ready.’ 

‘Wait, we must attend to the dog first. Bring the comb,’ Flory said. 

The two men squatted on the floor together and combed Flo’s silky coat and 
felt between her toes, picking out the ticks. It had to be done every evening. 
She picked up vast numbers of ticks during the day, horrible grey things that 
were the size of pin-heads when they got on to her, and gorged themselves till 
they were as large as peas. As each tick was detached Ko S’la put it on the floor 
and carefully crushed it with his big toe. 

Then Flory shaved, bathed, dressed, and sat down to dinner. Ko S’la stood 
behind his chair, handing him the dishes and fanning him with the wicker fan. 
He had arranged a bowl of scarlet hibiscus flowers in the middle of the 
little table. The meal was pretentious and filthy. The clever ‘Mug’ cooks, 
descendants of servants trained by Frenchmen in India centuries ago, can do 
anything with food except make it eatable. After dinner Flory walked down to 
the Club, to play bridge and get three parts drunk, as he did most evenings 
when he was in Kyauktada. 


5 


In spite of the whisky he had drunk at the Club, Flory had little sleep that 
night. The pariah curs were baying the moon-it was only a quarter full and 
nearly down by midnight, but the dogs slept all day in the heat, and they had 
begun their moon-choruses already. One dog had taken a dislike to Flory’s 
house, and had settled down to bay at it systematically. Sitting on its bottom 
fifty yards from the gate, it let out sharp, angry yelps, one to half a minute, as 
regularly as a clock. It would keep this up for two or three hours, until the 
cocks began crowing. 

Flory lay turning from side to side, his head aching. Some fool has said that 
one cannot hate an animal; he should try a few nights in India, when the dogs 
are baying the moon. In the end Flory could stand it no longer. He got up, 
rummaged in the tin uniform case under his bed for a rifle and a couple of 
cartridges, and went out on to the veranda. 

It was fairly light in the quarter moon. He could see the dog, and he could 
see his foresight. He rested himself against the wooden pillar of the veranda 
and took aim carefully; then, as he felt the hard vulcanite butt against his bare 
shoulder, he flinched. The rifle had a heavy kick, and it left a bruise when one 
fired it. The soft flesh of his shoulder quailed. He lowered the rifle. He had not 
the nerve to fire it in cold blood. 



Burmese Days log 

It was no use trying to sleep. Flory got his jacket and some cigarettes, and 
began to stroll up and down the garden path, between the ghostly flowers. It 
was hot, and the mosquitoes found him out and came droning after him. 
Phantoms of dogs were chasing one another on the maidan. Over to the left the 
gravestones of the English cemetery glittered whitish, rather sinister, and one 
could see the mounds near by, that were the remains of old Chinese tombs. 
The hillside was said to be haunted, and the Club chokras cried when they were 
sent up the road at night. 

‘Cur, spineless cur,’ Flory was thinking to himself; without heat, however, 
for he was too accustomed to the thought. ‘Sneaking, idling, boozing, 
fornicating, soul-examining, self-pitying cur. All those fools at the Club, those 
dull louts to whom you are so pleased to think yourself superior-they are all 
better than you, every man of them. At least they are men in their oafish way. 
Not cowards, not liars. Not half-dead and rotting. But you-’ 

He had reason to call himself names. There had been a nasty, dirty affair at 
the Club that evening. Something quite ordinary, quite according to 
precedent; but still dingy, cowardly, dishonouring. 

When Flory had arrived at the Club only Ellis and Maxwell were there. The 
Lackersteens had gone to the station with the loan of Mr Macgregor’s car, to 
meet their niece, who was to arrive by the night train. The three men were 
playing three-handed bridge fairly amicably when Westfield came in, his 
sandy face quite pink with rage, bringing a copy of a Burmese paper called the 
Burmese Patriot . There was a libellous article in it, attacking Mr Macgregor. 
The rage of Ellis and Westfield was devilish. They were so angry that Flory 
had the greatest difficulty in pretending to be angry enough to satisfy them. 
Ellis spent five minutes in cursing and then, by some extraordinary process, 
made up his mind that Dr Veraswami was responsible for the article. And he 
had thought of a counterstroke already. They would put a notice on the 
board -a notice answering and contradicting the one Mr Macgregor had 
posted the day before. Ellis wrote it out immediately, in his tiny, clear 
handwriting: 

‘In view of the cowardly insult recently offered to our Deputy 
Commissioner, we the undersigned wish to give it as our opinion that this is 
the worst possible moment to consider the election of niggers to this Club,’ 
etc., etc. 

Westfield demurred to ‘niggers’. It was crossed out by a single thin line and 
‘natives’ substituted. The notice was signed ‘R. Westfield, P.W. Ellis, 
C. W. Maxwell, J. Flory.’ 

Ellis was so pleased with his idea that quite half of his anger evaporated. The 
notice would accomplish nothing in itself, but the news of it would travel 
swiftly round the town, and would reach Dr Veraswami tomorrow. In effect, 
the doctor would have been publicly called a nigger by the European 
community. This delighted Ellis. For the rest of the evening he could hardly 
keep his eyes from the notice-board, and every few minutes he exclaimed in 
glee, ‘That’ll give little fat-belly something to think about, eh? Teach the httie 
sod what we think of him. That’s the way to put ’em in their place, eh T etc. 



i io Burmese Days 

Meanwhile, Flory had signed a public insult to his friend. He had done it for 
the same reason as he had done a thousand such things in his life; because he 
lacked the small spark of courage that was needed to refuse. For, of course, he 
could have refused if he had chosen; and, equally of course, refusal would have 
meant a row with Ellis and Westfield. And oh, how he loathed a row! The 
nagging, the jeers! At the very thought of it he flinched; he could feel his 
birthmark palpable on his cheek, and something happening in his throat that 
made his voice go flat and guilty. Not that! It was easier to insult his friend, 
knowing that his friend must hear of it. 

Flory had been fifteen years in Burma, and in Burma one learns not to set 
oneself up against public opinion. But his trouble was older than that. It had 
begun in his mother’s womb, when chance put the blue birthmark on his 
cheek. He thought of some of the early effects of his birthmark. His first arrival 
at school, aged nine; the stares and, after a few days, shouts of the other boys; 
the nickname Blueface, which lasted until the school poet (now, Flory 
remembered, a critic who wrote rather good articles in the Nation ) came out 
with the couplet: 

New-uck Flory does look rum. 

Got a face like a monkey’s bum, 

whereupon the nickname was changed to Monkey-bum. And the subsequent 
years. On Saturday nights the older boys used to have what they called a 
Spanish Inquisition. The favourite torture was for someone to hold you in a 
very painful grip known only to a few illuminati and called Special Togo, while 
someone else beat you with a conker on a piece of string. But Flory had lived 
down ‘Monkey-bum’ in time. He was a liar, and a good footballer, the two 
things absolutely necessary for success at school. In his last term he and 
another boy held the school poet in Special Togo while the captain of the 
eleven gave him six with a spiked running shoe for being caught writing a 
sonnet. It was a formative period. 

From that school he went to a cheap, third-rate public school. It was a poor, 
spurious place. It aped the great public schools with their traditions of High 
Anglicanism, cricket and Latin verses, and it had a school song called ‘The 
Scrum of Life’ in which God figured as the Great Referee. But it lacked the 
chief virtue of the great public schools, their atmosphere of literary 
scholarship. The boys learned as nearly as possible nothing. There was not 
enough caning to make them swallow the dreary rubbish of the curriculum, 
and the wretched, underpaid masters were not the kind from whom one 
absorbs wisdom unawares. Flory left school a barbarous young lout. And yet 
even then there were, and he knew it, certain possibilities in him; possibilities 
that would lead to trouble as likely as not. But, of course, he had suppressed 
them. A boy does not start his career nicknamed Monkey-bum without 
learning his lesson. 

He was not quite twenty when he came to Burma. His parents, good people 
and devoted to him, had found him a place in a timber firm. They had had 
great difficulty in getting him the job, had {raid a premium they could not 
afford; later, he had rewarded them by answering their letters with careless 



Burmese Days ill 

scrawls at intervals of months. His first six months in Burma he had spent in 
Rangoon, where he was supposed to be learning the office side of his business. 
He had lived in a ‘chummery’ with four other youths who devoted their entire 
energies to debauchery. And what debauchery! They swilled whisky which 
they privately hated, they stood round the piano bawling songs of insane 
filthiness and silliness, they squandered rupees by the hundred on aged Jewish 
whores with the faces of crocodiles. That too had been a formative period. 

From Rangoon he had gone to a camp in the jungle, north of Mandalay, 
extracting teak. The jungle life was not a bad one, m spite of the discomfort, 
the loneliness, and what is almost the worst thing in Burma, the filthy, 
monotonous food. He was very young then, young enough for hero-worship, 
and he had friends among the men in his firm. There were also shooting, 
fishing, and perhaps once in a year a hurried trip to Rangoon-pretext, a visit to 
the dentist. Oh, the joy of those Rangoon tnps! The rush to Smart and 
Mookerdum’s bookshop for the new novels out from England, the dinner at 
Anderson’s with beefsteaks and butter that had travelled eight thousand miles 
on ice, the glorious drinking-bout! He was too young to realize what this life 
was preparing for him. He did not see the years stretching out ahead, lonely, 
eventless, corrupting. 

He acclimatized himself to Burma. His body grew attuned to the strange 
rhythms of the tropical seasons. Every year from February to May the sun 
glared in the sky like an angry god, then suddenly the monsoon blew westward, 
first in sharp squalls, then in a heavy ceaseless downpour that drenched 
everything until neither one’s clothes, one’s bed nor even one’s food ever 
seemed to be dry. It was still hot, with a stuffy, vaporous heat. The lower 
jungle paths turned into morasses, and the paddy-fields were wastes of 
stagnant water with a stale, mousy smell. Books and boots were mildewed. 
Naked Burmans in yard-wide hats of palm-leaf ploughed the paddy-fields, 
driving their buffaloes through knee-deep water. Later, the women and 
children planted the green seedlings of paddy, dabbing each plant into the 
mud with little three-pronged forks. Through July and August there was 
hardly a pause in the rain. Then one night, high overhead, one heard a 
squawking of invisible birds. The snipe were flying southward from Central 
Asia. The rains tailed off, ending in October. The fields dried up, the paddy 
ripened, the Burmese children played hop-scotch with gonyin seeds and flew 
kites in the cool winds. It was the beginning of the short winter, when Upper 
Burma seemed haunted by the ghost of England. Wild flowers sprang into 
bloom everywhere, not quite the same as the English ones, but very like 
them-honeysuckle in thick bushes, field roses smelling of pear-drops, even 
violets in dark places of the forest. The sun circled low in the sky, and the 
nights and early mornings were bitterly cold, with white mists that poured 
through the valleys like the steam of enormous kettles. One went shooting after 
duck and snipe. There were snipe in countless myriads, and wild geese in 
flocks that rose from the jeel with a roar like a goods train crossing an iron 
bridge. The ripening paddy, breast-high and yellow, looked like wheat. The 
Burmans went to their work with muffled heads and their arms clasped across 



1 12 Burmese Days 

their breasts, their faces yellow and pinched with the cold. In the morning one 
marched through misty, incongruous wilderness, clearings of drenched, 
almost English grass and naked trees where monkeys squatted in the upper 
branches, waiting for the sun. At night, coming back to camp through the cold 
lanes, one met herds of buffaloes which the boys were driving home, with their 
huge horns looming through the mist like crescents. One had three blankets on 
one’s bed, and game pies instead of the eternal chicken. After dinner one sat on 
a log by the vast camp-fire, drinking beer and talking about shooting. The 
flames danced like red holly, casting a circle of light at the edge of which 
servants and coolies squatted, too shy to intrude on the white men and yet 
edging up to the fire like dogs. As one lay in bed one could hear the dew 
dripping from the trees like large but gentle rain. It was a good life while one 
was young and need not think about the future or the past. 

Flory was twenty-four, and due for home leave, when the War broke out. He 
had dodged military service, which was easy to do and seemed natural at the 
time. The civilians in Burma had a comforting theory that ‘sticking by one’s 
job’ (wonderful language, English!/ Sticking Zjy’-how different from ‘sticking 
to') was the truest patriotism; there was even a covert hostility towards the men 
who threw up their jobs in order to join the Army. In reality, Flory had dodged 
the War because the East already corrupted him, and he did not want to 
exchange his whisky, his servants and his Burmese girls for the boredom of the 
parade ground and the strain of cruel marches. The War rolled on, like a storm 
beyond the horizon. The hot, blowsy country, remote from danger, had a 
lonely, forgotten feeling. Flory took to reading voraciously, and learned to live 
in books when life was tiresome. He was growing adult, tiring of boyish 
pleasures, learning to think for himself, almost willy-nilly. 

He celebrated his twenty-seventh birthday in hospital, covered from head to 
foot with hideous sores which were called mud-sores, but were probably 
caused by whisky and bad food. They left little pits in his skin which did not 
disappear for two years. Quite suddenly he had begun to look and feel very 
much older. His youth was finished. Eight years of Eastern life, fever, 
loneliness and intermittent drinking, had set their mark on him. 

Since then, each year had been lonelier and more bitter than the last. What 
was at the centre of all his thoughts now, and what poisoned everything, was 
the ever bitterer hatred of the atmosphere of imperialism in which he lived. 
For as his brain developed-you cannot stop your brain developing, and it is 
one of the tragedies of the half-educated that they develop late, when they are 
already committed to some wrong way of life-he had grasped the truth about 
the English and their Empire. The Indian Empire is a despotism-benevolent, 
no doubt, but still a despotism with theft as its final object. And as to the 
English of the East, the sahiblog, Flory had come so to hate them from living in 
their society, that he was quite incapable of being fair to them. For after all, the 
poor devils are no worse than anybody else. They lead unenviable lives; it is a 
poor bargain to spend thirty years, ill-paid, in an alien country, and then come 
home with a wrecked liver and a pine-apple backside from sitting in cane 
chairs, to settle down as the bore of some second-rate Qub. On the other hand. 



Burmese Days 113 

the sahiblog are not to be idealized. There is a prevalent idea that the men at the 
‘outposts of Empire 5 are at least able and hardworking. It is a delusion. Outside 
the scientific services-the Forest Department, the Public Works Department 
and the like-there is no particular need for a British official in India to do his 
job competently. Few of them work as hard or as intelligently as the post- 
master of a provincial town in England. The real work of administration is 
done mainly by native subordinates; and the real backbone of the despotism is 
not the officials but the Army. Given the Army, the officials and the 
businessmen can rub along safely enough even if they are fools. And most of 
them are fools. A dull, decent people, cherishing and fortifying their dullness 
behind a quarter of a million bayonets. 

It is a stifling, stultifying world in which to live. It is a world in which every 
word and every thought is censored. In England it is hard even to imagine such 
an atmosphere. Everyone is free in England; we sell our souls in public and buy 
them back in private, among our friends. But even friendship can hardly exist 
when every white man is a cog in the wheels of despotism. Free speech is 
unthinkable. All other kinds of freedom are permitted. You are free to be a 
drunkard, an idler, a coward, a backbiter, a fornicator; but you are not free to 
think for' yourself. Your opinion on every subject of any conceivable 
importance is dictated for you by the pukka sahibs’ code. 

In the end the secrecy of your revolt poisons you like a secret disease. Your 
whole life is a life of lies. Year after year you sit in Kipling-haunted little 
Clubs, whisky to right of you, Pink’un to left of you, listening and eagerly 
agreeing while Colonel Bodger develops his theory that these bloody 
Nationalists should be boiled in oil. You hear your Oriental friends called 
‘greasy little babus 5 , and you admit, dutifully, that they are greasy little babus. 
You see louts fresh from school kicking grey-haired servants. The time comes 
when you burn with hatred of your own countrymen, when you long for a 
native rising to drown their Empire in blood. And in this there is nothing 
honourable, hardly even any sincerity. For, au fond , what do you care if the 
Indian Empire is a despotism, if Indians are bullied and exploited? You only 
care because the right of free speech is denied you. You are a creature of the 
despotism, a pukka sahib, tied tighter than a monk or a savage by an 
unbreakable system of tabus. 

Time passed and each year Flory found himself less at home in the world of 
the sahibs, more liable to get into trouble when he talked seriously on any 
subject whatever. So he had learned to live inwardly, secretly, in books and 
secret thoughts that could not be uttered. Even his talks with the doctor were a 
kind of talking to himself; for the doctor, good man, understood little of what 
was said to him. But it is a corrupting thing to live one’s real life in secret. One 
should live with the stream of life, not against it. It would be better to be the 
thickest-skulled pukka sahib who ever hiccuped over ‘Forty years on 5 , than to 
live silent, alone, consoling oneself in secret, sterile worlds. 1 

Flory had never been home to England. Why, he could not have explained, 
though he knew well enough. In the beginning accidents had prevented him. 
First there was the War, and after the War his firm were so short of trained 



1 14 Burmese Days 

assistants that they would not let him go for two years more. Then at last he 
had set out. He was pining for England, though he dreaded facing it, as one 
dreads facing a pretty girl when one is collarless and unshaven. When he left 
home he had been a boy, a promising boy and handsome in spite of his 
birthmark,- now, only ten years later, he was yellow, thin, drunken, almost 
middle-aged in habits and appearance. Still, he was pining for England. The 
ship rolled westward over wastes of sea like rough-beaten silver, with the 
winter trade wind behind her. Flory’s thin blood quickenened with the good 
food and the smell of the sea. And it occurred to him -a thing he had actually 
forgotten in the stagnant air of Burma-that he was still young enough to begin 
over again. He would live a year in a civilized society, he would find some girl 
who did not mind his birthmark-a civilized girl, not a pukka memsahib-and 
he would marry her and endure ten, fifteen more years of Burma. Then they 
would retire-he would be worth twelve or fifteen thousand pounds on 
retirement, perhaps. They would buy a cottage m the country, surround 
themselves with friends, books, their children, animals. They would be free 
for ever of the smell of pukka sahibdom. He would forget Burma, the horrible 
country that had come near ruining him. 

When he reached Colombo he found a cable waiting for him. Three men in 
his firm had died suddenly of black-water fever. The firm were sorry, but 
would he please return to Rangoon at once? He should have his leave at the 
earliest possible opportunity. 

Flory boarded the next boat for Rangoon, cursing his luck, and took the 
train back to his headquarters. He was not at Kyauktada then, but at another 
Upper Burma town. All the servants were waiting for him on the platform. He 
had handed them over en bloc to his successor, who had died. It was so queer to 
see their familiar faces again! Only ten days ago he had been speeding for 
England, almost thinking himself in England already; and now back in the old 
stale scene, with the naked black coolies squabbling over the luggage and a 
Burman shouting at his bullocks down the road. 

The servants came crowding round him, a ring of kindly brown faces, 
offering presents. Ko S’la had brought a sambhur skin, the Indians some 
sweetmeats and a garland of marigolds, Ba Pe, a young boy then, a squirrel in a 
wicker cage. There were bullock carts waiting for the luggage. Flory walked up 
to the house, looking ridiculous with the big garland dangling from his neck. 
The light of the cold-weather evening was yellow and kind. At the gate an old 
Indian, the colour of earth, was cropping grass with a tiny sickle. The wives of 
the cook and the mail were kneeling in front of the servants’ quarters, grinding 
curry paste on the stone slab. 

Something turned over in Flory’s heart- It was one of those moments when 
one becomes conscious of a vast change and deterioration in one’s life. For he 
had realized, suddenly, that in his heart he was glad to be coming back. This 
country which he hated was now his native country, his home. He had lived 
here ten years, and every particle of his, body was compounded of Burmese 
soil. Scenes like these-the sallow evening light, the old Indian cropping grass, 
the creak of the cartwheels, the streaming egrets -were more native to him than 



Burmese Days n 5 

England. He had sent deep roots, perhaps his deepest, into a foreign country. 

Since then he had not even applied for home leave. His father had died, then 
his mother, and his sisters, disagreeable horse-faced women whom he had 
never liked, had married and he had almost lost touch with them. He had no tie 
with Europe now, except the tie of books. For he had realized that merely to go 
back to England was no remedy for loneliness; he had grasped the special 
nature of the hell that is reserved for Anglo-Indians. Ah, those poor prosing 
old wrecks in Bath and Cheltenham! Those tomb-like boarding-houses with 
Anglo-Indians littered about in all stages of decomposition, all talking and 
talking about what happened in Boggleywalah in ’88! Poor devils, they know 
what it means to have left one’s heart in an alien and hated country. There was, 
he saw clearly, only one way out. To find someone who would share his life in 
Burma-but really share it, share his inner, secret life, carry away from Burma 
the same memories as he carried. Someone who would love Burma as he loved 
it and hate it as he hated it. Who would help him to live with nothing hidden, 
nothing unexpressed. Someone who understood him: a friend, that was what it 
came down to. 

A friend. Or a wife? That quite impossible she. Someone like Mrs 
Lackersteen, for instance? Some damned memsahib, yellow and thin, 
scandalmongering over cocktails, making kit-kit with the servants, living 
twenty years in the country without learning a word of the language. Not one 
of those, please God. 

Flory leaned over the gate. The moon was vanishing behind the dark wall of 
the jungle, but the dogs were still howling. Some lines from Gilbert came into 
his mind, a vulgar silly jingle but appropriate- something about ‘discoursing 
on your complicated state of mind’. Gilbert was a gifted little skunk. Did all his 
trouble, then, simply boil down to that? Just complicated, unmanly whinings; 
poor-little-rich-girl stuff? Was he no more than a loafer using his idleness to 
invent imaginary woes? A spiritual Mrs Wititterly? A Hamlet without poetry? 
Perhaps. And if so, did that make it any more bearable? It is not the less bitter 
because it is perhaps one’s own fault, to see oneself drifting, rotting, in 
dishonour and horrible futility, and all the while knowing that somewhere 
within one there is the possibility of a decent human being. 

Oh well, God save us from self-pity! Flory went back to the veranda, took up 
the rifle, and wincing slightly, let drive at the pariah dog. There was an echoing 
roar, and the bullet buried itself in the maidan, wide of the mark. A mulberry- 
coloured bruise sprang out on Flory’s shoulder. The dog gave a yell of fright, 
took to its heels, and then, sitting down fifty yards farther away, once more 
began rhythmically baying. 



6 


The morning sunlight slanted up the maidan and struck, yellow as goldleaf, 
against the white face of the bungalow. Four black-purple crows swooped 
down and perched on the veranda rail, waiting their chance to dart in and steal 
the bread and butter that Ko S’la had set down beside Flory’s bed. Flory 
crawled through the mosquito net, shouted to Ko S’la to bring him some gin, 
and then went into the bathroom and sat for a while in a zinc tub of water that 
was supposed to be cold. Feeling better after the gin, he shaved himself. As a 
rule he put off shaving until the evening, for his beard was black and grew 
quickly. 

While Flory was sitting morosely in his bath, Mr Macgregor, in shorts and 
singlet on the bamboo mat laid for the purpose in his bedroom, was struggling 
with Numbers 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 of Nordenflycht’s ‘Physical Jerks for the 
Sedentary’. Mr Macgegor never, or hardly ever, missed his morning exercises. 
Number 8 (flat on the back, raise legs to the perpendicular without bending 
knees) was downright painful for a man of forty-three; Number 9 (flat on the 
back, rise to a sitting posture and touch toes with tips of fingers) was even 
worse. No matter, one must keep fit! As Mr Macgregor lunged painfully in the 
direction of his toes, a brick-red shade flowed upwards from his neck and 
congested his face with a threat of apoplexy. The sweat gleamed on his large, 
tallowy breasts. Stick it out, stick it out! At all costs one must keep fit. 
Mohammed Ali, the bearer, with Mr Macgregor’s clean clothes across his arm, 
watched through the half-open door. His narrow, yellow, Arabian face 
expressed neither comprehension nor curiosity. He had watched these 
contortions— a sacrifice, he dimly imagined, to some mysterious and exacting 
god-every morning for five years. 

At the same time, too, Westfield, who had gone out early, was leaning 
against the notched and ink-stained table of the police station, while the fat 
Sub-inspector interrogated a suspect whom two constables were guarding. 
The suspect was a man of forty, with a grey, timorous face, dressed only in a 
ragged longyi kilted to the knee, beneath which his lank, curved shins were 
speckled with tick-bites. 

‘Who is this fellow?’ said Westfield. 

‘Thief, sir. We catch him in possession of this ring with two emeralds very- 
dear. No explanation. How could he-poor coolie-own a emerald ring? He 
have stole it.’ 

He turned' ferociously upon the suspect, advanced his face tomcat-fashion 



Burmese Days jjj 

till it was almost touching the other’s, and roared in an enormous voice; 

‘You stole the ring!’ 

‘No.’ 

‘You are an old offender!’ 

‘No.’ 

‘You have been in prison!’ 

‘No.’ 

‘Turn round!’ bellowed the Sub-inspector on an inspiration. ‘Bend over!’ 

The suspect turned his grey face in agony towards Westfield, who looked 
away. The two constables seized him, twisted him round and bent him over; 
the Sub-inspector tore off his longyi , exposing his buttocks. 

‘Look at this, sir!’ He pointed to some scars. ‘He have been flogged with 
bamboos. He is an old offender. Therefore he stole the ring!’ 

‘All right, put him in the clink,’ said Westfield moodily, as he lounged away 
from the table with his hands in his pockets. At the bottom of his heart he 
loathed running in these poor devils of common thieves. Dacoits, rebels-yes; 
but not these poor cringing rats! ‘How many have you got in the clink now, 
Maung Ba?’ he said. 

‘Three, sir.’ 

The lock-up was upstairs, a cage surrounded by six-inch wooden bars, 
guarded by a constable armed with a carbine. It was very dark, stifling hot, and 
quite unfurnished, except for an earth latrine that stank to heaven. Two 
prisoners were squatting at the bars, keeping their distance from a third, an 
Indian coolie, who was covered from head to foot with ringworm like, a coat of 
mail. A stout Burmese woman, wife of a constable, was kneeling outside the 
cage ladling rice and watery dahl into tin pannikins. 

‘Is the food good?’ said Westfield. 

‘It is good, most holy one,’ chorused the prisoners. 

The Government provided for the prisoners’ food at the rate of two annas 
and a half per meal per man, out of which the constable’s wife looked to make a 
profit of one anna. 

Flory went outside and loitered down the compound, poking weeds into the 
ground with his stick. At that hour there were beautiful faint colours in 
everything-tender green of leaves, pinkish brown of earth and tree- 
trunks-like aquarelle washes that would vanish in the later glare. Down on the 
maidan flights of small, low-flying brown doves chased one another to and fro, 
and bee-eaters, emerald-green, curvetted like slow swallows. A file of 
sweepers, each with his load half hidden beneath his garment, were marching 
to some dreadful dumping-hole that existed on the edge of the jungle. 
Starveling wretches, with stick-like limbs and knees too feeble to be 
straightened, draped in earth-coloured rags, they were like a procession of 
shrouded skeletons walking. 

The mali was breaking ground for a new flower-bed, down by the pigeon- 
cote that stood near the gate. He was a lymphatic, half-witted Hindu youth, 
who lived his life in almost complete silence, because he spoke some Manipur 
dialect which nobody else understood, not even his Zerbadi wife. His tongue 



1 1 8 Burmese Days 

was also a size too large for his mouth. He salaamed low to Flory, covering his 
face with his hand, then swung his mamootie aloft again and hacked at the dry 
ground with heavy, clumsy strokes, his tender back-muscles quivering. 

A sharp grating scream that sounded like ‘Kwaaa!’ came from the servants’ 
quarters. Ko S’la’s wives had begun their morning quarrel. The tame fighting 
cock, called Nero, strutted zigzag down the path, nervous of Flo, and Ba Pe 
came out with a bowl of paddy and they fed Nero and the pigeons. There were 
more yells from the servants’ quarters, and the gruffer voices of men trying to 
stop the q ua rrel Ko S’la suffered a great deal from his wives. Ma Pu, the first 
wife, was a gaunt hard-faced woman, stringy from much child-bearing, and 
Ma Yi, the ‘little wife’, was a fat, lazy cat some years younger. The two women 
fought incessantly when Flory was in headquarters and they were together. 
Once when Ma Pu was chasing Ko S’la with a bamboo, he had dodged behind 
Flory for protection, and Flory had received a nasty blow on the leg. 

Mr Macgregor was coming up the road, striding briskly and swinging a 
thick walking-stick. He was dressed in khaki pagri-cloth shirt, drill shorts and 
a pigsticker topi. Besides his exercises, he took a brisk two-mile walk every 
morning when he could spare the time. 

‘Top o’ the mornin’ to ye!’ he called to Flory in a hearty matutinal voice, 
putting on an Irish accent. He cultivated a brisk, invigorating, cold-bath 
demeanour at this hour of the morning. Moreover, the libellous article in the 
Burmese Patriot , which he had read overnight, had hurt him, and he was 
affecting a special cheeriness to conceal this. 

‘Morning!’ Flory called back as heartily as he could manage. 

Nasty old bladder of lard! he thought, watching Mr Macgregor up the road. 
How his bottom did stick out in those tight khaki shorts. Like one of those 
beastly middle-aged scoutmasters, homosexuals almost to a man, that you see 
photographs of in the illustrated papers. Dressing himself up in those 
ridiculous clothes and exposing his pudgy, dimpled knees, because it is the 
pukka sahib thing to take exercise before breakfast-disgusting! 

A Burman came up the hill, a splash of white and magenta. It was Flory’ s 
clerk, coming from the tiny office, which was not far from the church. 
Reaching the gate, he shikoed and presented a grimy envelope, stamped 
Burmese-fashion on the point of the flap. 

‘Good morning, sir.’ 

‘Good morning. What’s this thing?’ 

‘Local letter, your honour. Come this morning’s post. Anonymous letter, I 
think, sir.’ 

‘Oh bother. All right. I’ll be down to the office about eleven.’ 

Flory opened the letter. It was written on a sheet of foolscap, and it ran: 

Mr John Flory, 

Sir,— I the undersigned beg to suggest and warn to your honour certain useful pieces of 
information whereby your honour will be much profited, sir. 

Sir, it has been remarked in Kyauktada your honour’s great friendship and intimacy with Dr 
Veraswami, the Civil Surgeon, frequenting with him, inviting him to your house, etc. Sir, we beg 
to inform you that the said Dr Veraswami is not a good man and in no ways a worthy friend of 
European gentlemen. The doctor is eminently dishonest, disloyal and corrupt public servant. 



Burmese Days ng 

Coloured water is he providing to patients at the hospital and selling drugs for own profit, besides 
many bribes, extortions, etc Two prisoners has he flogged with bamboos, afterwards rubbing 
chilis into the place if relatives do not send money Besides this he is implicated with the 
Nationalist Party and lately provided material for a very evil article which appeared in the Burmese 
Patriot attacking Mr Macgregor, the honoured Deputy Commissioner 

He is also sleeping by force with female patients at the hospital 

Wherefore we are much hoping that your honour will eschew same Dr Veraswami and not 
consort with persons who can bring nothing but evil upon your honour 

And shall ever pray for your honour’s long health and prosperity 

(Signed) A FRIEND 

The letter was written in the shaky round hand of the bazaar letter-writer, 
which resembled a copybook exercise written by a drunkard. The letter- 
writer, however, would never have risen to such a word as ‘eschew’. The letter 
must have been dictated by a clerk, and no doubt it came ultimately from U Po 
Kyin. From ‘the crocodile’, Flory reflected. 

He did not like the tone of the letter. Under its appearance of servility it was 
obviously a covert threat. ‘Drop the doctor or we will make it hot for you’, was 
what it said in effect. Not that that mattered greatly; no Englishman ever feels 
himself in real danger from an Oriental. 

Flory hesitated with the letter in his hands. There are two things one can do 
with an anonymous letter. One can say nothing about it, or one can show it to 
the person whom it concerns. The obvious, the decent course was to give the 
letter to Dr Veraswami and let him take what action he chose. 

And yet-it was safer to keep out of this business altogether. It is so 
important (perhaps the most important of all the Ten Precepts of the pukka 
sahib) not to entangle oneself in ‘native’ quarrels. With Indians there must be 
no loyalty, no real friendship. Affection, even love-yes. Englishmen do often 
love Indians-native officers, forest rangers, hunters, clerks, servants. Sepoys 
will weep like children when their colonel retires. Even intimacy is allowable, 
at the right moments. But alliance, partisanship, never! Even to know the 
rights and wrongs of a ‘native’ quarrel is a loss of prestige. 

If he published the letter there would be a row and an official inquiry, and, in 
effect, he would have thrown in his lot with the doctor against U Po Kyin. U 
Po Kyin did not matter, but there were the Europeans; if he, Flory, were too 
conspicuously the doctor’s partisan, there might be hell to pay. Much better to 
pretend that the letter had never reached him. The doctor was a good fellow, 
but as to championing him against the full fury of pukka sahibdom-ah, no, no! 
What shall it profit a man if he save his own soul and lose the whole world? 
Flory began to tear the letter across. The danger of making it public was very 
slight, very nebulous. But one must beware of the nebulous dangers in India. 
Prestige, the breath of life, is itself nebulous. He carefully tore the letter into 
small .pieces and threw them over the gate. 

At this moment there was a terrified scream, quite different from the voices 
of Ko S’la’s wives. The mali lowered his mamootie and gaped in the direction of 
the sound, and Ko S’la, who had also heard it, came running bareheaded from 
the servants’ quarters, while Flo sprang to her feet and yapped sharply. The 
scream was repeated. It came from the jungle behind the house, and it was an 



j 20 Burmese Days 

English voice, a woman’s, crying out in terror. 

There was no way out of the compound by the back. Flory scrambled over 
the gate and came down with his knee bleeding from, a splinter. He ran round 
the compound fence and into the jungle, Flo following. Just behind the house, 
beyond the first fringe of bushes, there was a small hollow, which, as there was 
a pool of stagnant water in it, was frequented by buffaloes from Nyaunglebin. 
Flory pushed his way through the bushes. In the hollow an English girl, chalk- 
faced, was cowering against a bush, while a huge buffalo menaced her with its 
crescent-shaped horns. A hairy calf, no doubt the cause of the trouble, stood 
behind. Another buffalo, neck-deep in the slime of the pool, looked on with 
mild prehistoric face, wondering what was the matter. 

The girl turned an agonized face to Flory as he appeared. ‘Oh, do be quick!’ 
she cried, in the angry, urgent tone of people who are frightened. ‘Please! Help 
me! Help me!’ 

Flory was too astonished to ask any questions. He hastened towards her, 
and, in default of a stick, smacked the buffalo sharply on the nose. With a 
timid, loutish movement the great beast turned aside, then lumbered off 
followed by the calf. The other buffalo also extricated itself from the slime and 
lolloped away. The girl threw herself against Flory, almost into his arms, quite 
overcome by her fright. 

‘Oh, thank you, thank you! Oh, those dreadful things! What are they? I 
thought they were going to kill me. What horrible creatures! What are they?’ 
‘They’re only water-buffaloes. They come from the village up there.’ 
‘Buffaloes?’ 

‘Not wild buffaloes-bison, we call those. They’re just a kind of cattle the 
Burmans keep. I say, they’ve given you a nasty shock. I’m sorry.’ 

She was still clinging closely to his arm, and he could feel her shaking. He 
looked down, but he could not see her face, only the top of her head, hatless, 
with yellow hair as short as a boy’s. And he could see one of the hands on his 
arm. It was long, slender, youthful, with the mottled wrist of a schoolgirl. It 
was several years since he had seen such a hand. He became conscious of the 
soft, youthful body pressed against his own, and the warmth breathing out of 
it; whereat something seemed to thaw and grow warm within him. 

‘It’s all right, they’re gone,’ he said. ‘There’s nothing to be frightened of.’ 
The girl was recovering from her fright, and she stood a little away from 
him, with one hand still on his arm. ‘I’m all right,’ she said ‘It’s nothing. I’m 
not hurt. They didn’t touch me. It was only their looking so awful.’ 

‘They’re quite harmless really. Their horns are set so far back that they can’t 
gore you. They’re very stupid brutes. They only pretend to show fight when 
they’ve- got calves.’ 

They had stood apart now, and a slight embarrassment came over them both 
immediately. Flory had already turned himself sidelong to keep his 
birthmarked cheek away from her. He said: 

‘I say, this is a queer sort of introduction! I haven’t asked yet how you got 
here. Wherever did you come from-if it’s not rude to ask?’ 

T just came out of my uncle’s garden. It seemed such a nice morning, I 



Burmese Days 1 21 

thought I’d go for a walk. And then those dreadful things came after me. I’m 
quite new to this country, you see.’ 

‘Your uncle? Oh, of course! You’re Mr Lackersteen’s niece. We heard you 
were coming. I say, shall we get out on to the maidan? There’ll be a path 
somewhere. What a start for your first morning in Kyauktada! This’ll give you 
rather a bad impression of Burma, I’m afraid.’ 

‘Oh no; only it’s all rather strange. How thick these bushes grow! All kind of 
twisted together and foreign-looking. You could get lost here in a moment. Is 
that what they call jungle?’ 

‘Scrub jungle. Burma’s mostly jungle-a green, unpleasant land, I call it. I 
wouldn’t walk through that grass if I were you. The seeds get into your 
stockings and work their way into your skin.’ 

He let the girl walk ahead of him, feeling easier when she could not see his 
face. She was tallish for a girl, slender, and wearing a lilac-coloured cotton 
frock. From the way she moved her limbs he did not think she could be much 
past twenty. He had not noticed her face yet, except to see that she wore round 
tortoise-shell spectacles, and that her hair was as short as his own. He had 
never seen a woman with cropped hair before, except in the illustrated papers. 

As they emerged on to the maidan he stepped level with her, and she turned 
to face him. Her face was oval, with delicate, regular features; not beautiful, 
perhaps, but it seemed so there, in Burma, where all Englishwomen are yellow 
and thin. He turned his head sharply aside, though the birthmark was away 
from her. He could not bear her to see his worn face too closely. He seemed to 
feel the withered skin round his eyes as though it had been a wound. But he 
remembered that he had shaved that morning, and it gave him courage. He 
said: 

‘I say, you must be a bit shaken up after this business. Would you like to 
come into my place and rest a few minutes before you go home? It’s rather late 
to be out of doors without a hat, too.’ 

‘Oh, thank you, I would,’ the girl said. She could not, he thought, know 
anything about Indian notions of propriety. ‘Is this your house here?’ 

‘Yes. We must go round the front way. I’ll have the servants get a sunshade 
for you. This sun’s dangerous for you, with your short hair.’ 

They walked up the garden path. Flo was frisking round them and trying to 
draw attention to herself. She always barked at strange Orientals, but she liked 
the smell of a European. The sun was growing stronger. A wave of 
blackcurrant scent flowed from the petunias beside the path, and one of the 
pigeons fluttered to the earth, to spring immediately into the air again as Flo 
made a grab at it. Flory and the girl stopped with one consent, to look at the 
flowers. A pang of unreasonable happiness had gone through thgm both. 

‘You really mustn’t go out in this sun without a hat on,’ he repeated, and 
somehow there was an intimacy in saying it. He could not help referring to her 
short hair somehow, it seemed to him so beautiful. To speak of it was hke 
touching it with his hand. 

‘Look, your knee’s bleeding,’ the girl said. ‘Did you do that when 
coming to help me?’ 



122 Burmese Days 

There was a slight trickle of blood, which was drying, purple, on his khaki 
stocking. ‘It’s nothing,’ he said, but neither of them felt at that moment that it 
was nothing. They began chattering with extraordinary eagerness about the 
flowers. The girl ‘adored’ flowers, she said. And Flory led her up the path, 
talking garrulously about one plant and another. 

‘Look how these phloxes grow. They go on blooming for six months in this 
country. They can’t get too much sun. I think those yellow ones must be 
almost the colour of primroses. I haven’t seen a primrose for fifteen years, nor a 
wallflower, either. Those zinnias are fine, aren’t they?-like painted flowers, 
with those wonderful dead colours. These are African marigolds. They’re 
coarse things, weeds almost, but you can’t help liking them, they’re so vivid 
and strong. Indians have an extraordinary affection for them; wherever 
Incjians have been you find marigolds growing, even years afterwards when the 
jungle has buried every other trace of them. But I wish you’d come into the 
veranda and see the orchids. I’ve some I must show that are just like bells of 
gold-but literally like gold. And they smell of honey, almost overpoweringly. 
That’s about the only merit of this beastly country, it’s good for flowers. I hope 
you’re fond of gardening? It’s our greatest consolation, in this country.’ 

‘Oh, I simply adore gardening,’ the girl said. 

They went into the veranda. Ko S’la had hurriedly put on his ingyi and his 
best pink silk gaungbaung , and he appeared from within the house with a tray 
on which were a decanter of gin, glasses and a box of cigarettes. He laid them 
on the table, and, eyeing the girl half apprehensively, put his hands flat 
together and shikoed. 

‘I expect it’s no use offering you a drink at this hour of the morning?’ Flory 
said. ‘I can never get it into my servant’s head that some people can exist 
without gin before breakfast.’ 

He added himself to the number by waving away the drink Ko S’la offered 
him. The girl had sat down in the wicker chair that Ko S’la had set out for her 
at the end of the veranda. The dark-leaved orchids hung behind her head, with 
gold trusses of blossom, breathing out warm honey-scent. Flory was standing 
against the veranda rail, half facing the girl, but keeping his birthmarked cheek 
hidden. 

‘What a perfectly divine view you have from here,’ she said as she looked 
down the hillside. 

‘Yes, isn’t it? Splendid, in this yellow light, before the sun gets going. I love 
that sombre yellow colour the maidan has, and those gold mohur trees, like 
blobs of crimson. And those hills at the horizon, almost black. My camp is on 
the other side of those hills,’ he added. 

The girl, jvho was long-sighted, took off her spectacles to look into the 
distance. He noticed that her eyes were very clear pale blue, paler than a 
harebell. And he noticed the smoothness of the skin round her eyes, like a 
petal, almost. It reminded him of his age and his haggard face again, so that he 
'turned a little more away from her. But he said on impulse: 

' *1 say, what a bit of luck you coming to Kyauktada! You can’t imagine the 
difference it makes to us to see a new .face in these places. After months of our 



Burmese Days 123 

own miserable society, and an occasional official on his rounds and American 
globe-trotters skipping up the Irrawaddy with cameras. I suppose you’ve 
come straight from England?’ 

‘Well, not England exactly. I was living in Paris before I came out here. My 
mother was an artist, you see. 5 

‘Paris! Have you really lived in Paris? By Jove, just fancy coming from Paris 
to Kyauktadal Do you know, it’s positively difficult, in a hole like this, to 
believe that there are such places as Paris.’ 

‘Do you like Paris?’ she said. 

‘I’ve never even seen it. But, good Lord, how I’ve imagined it! Paris-it’s all 
a kind of jumble of pictures in my mind; cafes and boulevards and artists’ 
studios and Villon and Baudelaire and Maupassant all mixed up together. You 
don’t know how the names of those European towns sound to us, out here. And 
did you really live in Paris? Sitting in cafes with foreign art students, drinking 
white wine and talking about Marcel Proust?’ 

‘Oh, that kind of thing, I suppose,’ said the girl, laughing. 

‘What differences you’ll find here! It’s not white wine and Marcel Proust 
here. Whisky and Edgar Wallace more likely. But if you ever want books, you 
might find something you liked among mine. There’s nothing but tripe in the 
Club library. But of course I’m hopelessly behind the times with my books. I 
expect you’ll have read everything under the sun.’ 

‘Oh no. But of course I simply adore reading,’ the girl said. 

‘What it means to meet somebody who cares for books! I mean books worth 
reading, not that garbage in the Club libraries. I do hope you’ll forgive me if I 
overwhelm you with talk. When I meet somebody who’s heard that books 
exist, I’m afraid I go off like a bottle of warm beer. It’s a fault you have to 
pardon in these countries.’ 

‘Oh, but I love talking about books. I think reading is so wonderful. I mean, 
what would life be without it? It’s such a-such a-’ 

‘Such a private Alsatia. Yes-’ 

They plunged into an enormous and eager conversation, first about books, 
then about shooting, in which the girl seemed to have an interest and about 
which she persuaded Flory to talk. She was quite thrilled when he described 
the murder of an elephant which he had perpetrated some years earlier. Flory 
scarcely noticed, and perhaps the girl did not either, that it was he who did all 
the talking. He could not stop himself, the joy of chattering was so great. And 
the girl was in a mood to listen. After all, he had saved her from the buffalo, and 
she did not yet believe that those monstrous brutes could be harmless; for the 
moment he was almost a hero in her eyes. When one does get any credit in this 
life, it is usually for something that one has not done. It was one of those times 
when the conversation flows so easily, so naturally, that one could go on talking 
forever. But suddenly, their pleasure evaporated, they started and fell silent. 
They had noticed that they were no longer alone. 

At the other end of the veranda, between the rails, a coal-black 
moustachioed face was peeping with enormous curiosity. It belonged to old 
Sammy, the ‘Mug’ cook. Behind him stood Ma Pu, Ma Yi; -Ko S¥s fdur 



j 24 Burmese Days 

eldest children, an unclaimed naked child, and two old women who had come 
down from the village upon the news that an ‘Ingaleikma was on view. Like 
carved teak statues with footlong cigars stuck in their wooden faces, the two 
old creatures gazed at the ‘Ingaleikma’ as English yokels might gaze at a Zulu 
warrior in full regalia. 

‘Those people . . .’ the girl said uncomfortably, looking towards them. 

Sammy, seeing himself detected, looked very guilty and pretended to be 
rearranging his pagri. The rest of the audience were a little abashed, except for 
the two wooden-faced old women. 

‘Dash their cheek!’ Flory said. A cold pang of disappointment went through 
him. After all, it would not do for the girl to stay on his veranda any longer. 
Simultaneously both he and she had remembered that they were total 
strangers. Her face had turned a little pink. She began putting on her 
spectacles. 

‘I’m afraid an English girl is rather a novelty to these people,’ he said. ‘They 
don’t mean any harm. Go away!’ he added angrily, waving his hand at the 
audience, whereupon they vanished. 

‘Do you know, if you don’t mind, I think I ought to be going,’ the girl said. 
She had stood up. Tve been out quite a long time. They may be wondering 
where I’ve got to.’ 

‘Must you really? It’s quite early. I’ll see that you don’t have to go home 
bareheaded in the sun.’ 

‘I ought really-’ she began again. 

She stopped, looking at the doorway. Ma Hla May was emerging on to the 
veranda. 

Ma Hla May came forward with her hand on her hip. She had come from 
within the house, with a calm air that asserted her right to be there. The two 
girls stood face to face, less than six feet apart. 

No contrast could have been stranger, the one faintly coloured as an apple- 
blossom, the other dark and garish, with a gleam almost metallic on her 
cylinder of ebony hair and the salmon-pink silk of her longyi. Flory thought he 
had never noticed before how dark Ma Hla May’s face was, and how 
outlandish her tiny, stiff body, straight as a soldier’s, with not a curve in it 
except the vase-like curve of her hips. He stood against the veranda rail and 
watched the two girls, quite disregarded. For the best part of a minute neither 
of them could take her eyes from the other; but which found the spectacle more 
grotesque, more incredible, there is no saying. 

Ma Hla May turned her face round to Flory, with her black brows, thin as 
pencil lines, drawn together. ‘Who is this woman?’ she demanded sullenly. 

He answered casually, as though giving an order to a servant: 

‘Go away this instant. If you make any trouble I will afterwards take a 
bamboo and beat you till not one of your ribs is whole.’ 

Ma Hla May hesitated, shrugged her small shoulders and disappeared. And 
the other, gazing after her, said curiously: 

‘Was that a man or a woman?’ 

‘A, woman,’ he said. ‘One of the servants’ wives, I believe. She came to ask 



Burmese Days 


125 


about the laundry, that was all.’ 

‘Oh, is that what Burmese women are like? They are queer little creatures! I 
saw a lot of them on my way up here in the train, but do you know, I thought 
they were all boys. They’re just like a kind of Dutch doll, aren’t they?’ 

She had begun to move towards the veranda steps, having lost interest in Ma 
Hla May now that she had disappeared. He did not stop her, for he thought Ma 
Hla May quite capable of coming back and making a scene. Not that it 
mattered much, for neither girl knew a word of the other’s language. He called 
to Ko S’ la, and Ko S’ la came running with a big oiled-silk umbrella with 
bamboo ribs. He opened it respectfully at the foot of the steps and held it over 
the girl’s head as she came down. Flory went with them as far as the gate. They 
stopped to shake hands, he turning a little sideways in the strong sunlight, 
hiding his birthmark. 

‘My fellow here will see you home. It was ever so kind of you to come in. I 
can’t tell you how glad I am to have met you. You’ll make such a difference to 
us here in Kyauktada.’ 

‘Good-bye, Mr-oh, how funny! I don’t even know your name.’ 

‘Flory, John Flory. And yours-Miss Lackersteen, is it?’ 

‘Yes. Elizabeth. Good-bye, Mr Flory. And thank you ever so much. That 
awful buffalo. You quite saved my life.’ 

‘It was nothing. I hope I shall see you at the Club this evening? I expect your 
uncle and aunt will be coming down. Good-bye for the time being, then.’ 

He stood at the gate, watching them as they went, Elizabeth-lovely name, 
too rare nowadays. He hoped she spelt it with a Z. Ko S’la trotted after her at a 
queer uncomfortable gait, reaching the umbrella over her head and keeping his 
body as far away from her as possible. A cool breath of wind blew up the hill. It 
was one of those momentary winds that blow sometimes in the cold weather in 
Burma, coming from nowhere, filling one with thirst and with nostalgia for 
cold sea-pools, embraces of mermaids, waterfalls, caves of ice. It rustled 
through the wide domes of the gold mohur trees, and fluttered the fragments of 
the anonymous letter that Flory had thrown over the gate half an hour earlier. 


7 


Elizabeth lay on the sofa in the Lackersteen’s drawing-room, with her feet up 
and a cushion behind her head, reading Michael Arlen’s These Charming 
People. In a general way Michael Arlen was her favourite author, but she was 
inclined to prefer William J. Locke when she wanted something serious. 

The drawing-room was a cool, light-coloured room with lime-washed walls 
a yard thick; it was large, but seemed smaller than' it was, because of a litter of 
occasional tables and Benares brassware ornaments. It smelt of chintz and 



126 Burmese Days 

dying flowers. Mrs Lackersteen was upstairs, sleeping. Outside, the servants 
lay silent in their quarters, their heads tethered to their wooden pillows by the 
death-like sleep of midday. Mr Lackersteen, in his small wooden office down 
the road, was probably sleeping too. No one stirred except Elizabeth, and the 
chokra who pulled the punkah outside Mrs Lackersteen’s bedroom, lying on 
his back with one heel in the loop of the rope. 

Elizabeth was just turned twenty-two, and was an orphan. Her father had 
been less of a drunkard than his brother Tom, but he was a man of similar 
stamp. He was a tea-broker, and his fortunes fluctuated greatly, but he was by 
nature too optimistic to put money aside in prosperous phases. Elizabeth’s 
mother had been an incapable, half-baked, vapouring, self-pitying woman 
who shirked all the normal duties of life on the strength of sensibilities which 
she did not possess. After messing about for years with such things as 
Women’s Suffrage and Higher Thought, and making many abortive attempts 
at literature, she had finally taken up with painting. Painting is the only art that 
can be practised without either talent or hard work. Mrs Lackersteen’s pose 
was that of an artist exiled among ‘the Philistines ’-these, needless to say, 
included her husband-and it was a pose that gave her almost unlimited scope 
for making a nuisance of herself. 

In the last year of the War Mr Lackersteen, who had managed to avoid 
service, made a great deal of money, and just after the Armistice they moved 
into a huge, new, rather bleak house in Highgate, with quantities of 
greenhouses, shrubberies, stables and tennis courts. Mr Lackersteen had 
engaged a horde of servants, even, so great was his optimism, a butler. 
Elizabeth was sent for two terms to a very expensive boarding-school. Oh, the 
joy, the joy, the unforgettable joy of those two terms! Four of the girls at the 
school were ‘the Honourable’; nearly all of them had ponies of their own, on 
which they were allowed to go riding on Saturday afternoons. There is a short 
period in everyone’s life when his character is fixed forever; with Elizabeth, it 
was those two terms during which she rubbed shoulders with the rich. 
Thereafter her whole code of living was summed up in one belief, and that a 
simple one. It was that the Good (‘lovely’ was her name for it) is synonymous 
with the expensive, the elegant, the aristocratic; and the Bad (‘beastly’) is the 
cheap, the low, the shabby, the laborious. Perhaps it is in order to teach this 
creed that expensive girls’ schools exist. The feeling subtilized itself as 
Elizabeth grew older, diffused itself through all her thoughts. Everything from 
a pair of stockings to a human soul was classifiable as ‘lovely’ or ‘beastly’. And 
unfortunately-for Mr Lackersteen’s prosperity did not last-it was the 
‘beastly’ that had predominated in her life. 

The inevitable crash came late in 1919- Elizabeth was taken away from 
school, to continue her education at a succession of cheap, beastly schools, 
with gaps of a term or two when her father could not pay the fees. He died 
when she was twenty, of influenza, Mrs Lackersteen was left with an income of 
£1 50 a year, which was to die with her. The two women could not, under Mrs 
Lackersteen’ s management, live on three pounds a week in England. They 
moved to Paris, where life was cheaper and where Mrs Lackersteen intended 



Burmese Days 1 27 

to dedicate herself wholly to Art. 

Paris! Living in Paris! Flory had been a little wide of the mark when he 
pictured those interminable conversations with bearded artists under the 
green plane trees. Elizabeth’s life in Paris had not been quite like that. 

Her mother had taken a studio in the Montparnasse quarter, and relapsed at 
once into a state of squalid, muddling idleness. She was so foolish with money 
that her income would not come near covering expenses, and for several 
months Elizabeth did not even have enough to eat. Then she found a job as 
visiting teacher of English to the family of a French bank manager. They called 
her ‘ notre mees Anglaise’. The banker lived in the twelfth arrondissement, a 
long way from Montparnasse, and Elizabeth had taken a room in a pension 
near by. It was a narrow, yellow-faced house in a side street, looking ou^t on to a 
poulterer’s shop, generally decorated with reeking carcasses of wild boars, 
which old gentlemen like decrepit satyrs would visit every morning and sniff 
long and lovingly. Next door to the poulterer’s was a fly-blown cafe with the 
sign ‘Cafe de l’Amitie. Bock Formidable 5 . How Elizabeth had loathed that 
pension! The patroness was an old black-clad sneak who spent her life in 
tiptoeing up and down stairs in hopes of catching the boarders washing 
stockings in their hand-basins. The boarders, sharp-tongued bilious widows, 
pursued the only man in the establishment, a mild, bald creature who worked 
in La Samaritaine, like sparrows worrying a bread-crust. At meals all of them 
watched each others’ plates to see who was given the biggest helping. The 
bathroom was a dark den with leprous walls and a rickety verdigrised geyser 
which would spit two inches of tepid water into the bath and then mulishly 
stop working. The bank manager whose children Elizabeth taught was a man 
of fifty, with a fat, worn face and a bald, dark yellow crown resembling an 
ostrich’s egg. The second day after her arrival he came into the room where the 
children were at their lessons, sat down beside Elizabeth and immediately 
pinched her elbow. The third day he pinched her on the calf, the fourth day 
behind the knee, the fifth day above the knee. Thereafter, every evening, it was 
a silent battle between the two of them, her hand under the table, struggling 
and struggling to keep that ferret-like hand away from her. 

It was a mean, beastly existence. In fact, it reached levels of ‘beastliness’ 
which Elizabeth had not previously known to exist. But the thing that most 
depressed her, most filled her with the sense of sinking into some horrible 
lower world, was her mother’s studio. Mrs Lackersteen was one of those 
people who go utterly to pieces when they are deprived of servants. She lived 
in a restless nightmare between painting and housekeeping, and never worked 
at either. At irregular intervals she went to a ‘school’ where she produced 
greyish still-lifes under the guidance of a master whose technique was founded 
on dirty brushes; for the rest, she messed about miserably at home with teapots 
and frying-pans. The state of her studio was more than depressing to 
Elizabeth; it was evil, Satanic. It was a cold, dusty pigsty, with piles of books 
and papers littered all over the floor, generations of saucepans slumbering in 
their grease on the rusty gas-stove, the bed never made till afternoon, and 
everywhere-in every possible place where they could be stepped on or 



128 Burmese Days 

knocked over— tins of paint-fouled turpentine and pots half full of cold black 
tea. You would lift a cushion from a chair and find a plate holding the remains 
of a poached egg underneath it. As soon as Elizabeth entered the door she 
would burst out: 

‘Oh, Mother, Mother dearest, how can you? Look at the state of this room! 
It is so terrible to live like this!’ , 

‘The room, dearest? What’s the matter? Is it untidy?’ 

‘Untidy! Mother, need you leave that plate of porridge in the middle of your 
bed? And those saucepans! It does look so dreadful. Suppose anyone came in!’ 

The rapt, other-wordly look which Mrs Lackersteen assumed when 
anything like work presented itself, would come into her eyes. 

‘None of my friends would mind, dear. We are such Bohemians, we artists. 
You don’t understand how utterly wrapped up we all are in our painting. You 
haven’t the artistic temperament, you see, dear.’ 

‘I must try and clean some of those saucepans. I just can’t bear to think of 
you livmg like this. What have you done with the scrubbing-brush?’ 

‘The scrubbing-brush? Now, let me think, I know I saw it somewhere. Ah 
yes! I used it yesterday to clean my palette. But it’ll be all right if you give it a 
good wash m turpentine.’ 

Mrs Lackersteen would sit down and continue smudging a sheet of 
sketching paper with a Conte crayon while Elizabeth worked. 

‘How wonderful you are, dear. So practical! I can’t think whom you inherit 
it from Now with me, Art is simply everything. I seem to feel it like a great sea 
surging up inside me. It swamps everything mean and petty out of existence. 
Yesterday I ate my lunch off Nash’s Magazine to save wasting time washing 
plates. Such a good idea! When you want a clean plate you just tear off a sheet,’ 
etc., etc., etc. 

Elizabeth had no friends in Paris. Her mother’s friends were women of the 
same stamp as herself, or elderly ineffectual bachelors living on small incomes 
and practising contemptible half-arts such as wood-engraving or painting on 
porcelain. For the rest, Elizabeth saw only foreigners, and she disliked all 
foreigners en bloc; or at least all foreign men, with their cheap-looking clothes 
and their revolting table manners. She had one great solace at this time. It was 
to go to the American library in the rue de l’Elysde and look at the illustrated 
papers. Sometimes on a Sunday or her free afternoon she would sit there for 
hours at the big shiny table, dreaming, over the Sketch , the Tatler , the 
Graphic , the Sporting and Dramatic. 

Ah, what joys were pictured there! ‘Hounds meeting on the lawn of 
Charlton Hall, the lovely Warwickshire seat of Lord Burro wdean.’ ‘The Hon. 
Mrs Tyke-Bowlby in the Park with her splendid Alsatian, Kublai Khan, 
which took second prize at Cruft’s this summer.’ ‘Sunbathing at Cannes. Left 
to right: Miss Barbara Pilbrick, Sir Edward Tuke, Lady Pamela Westrope, 
Captain “Tuppy” Benacre.’ 

Lovely, lovely, golden world! On two occasions the face of an old 
schoolfellow looked at Elizabeth from the page. It hurt her in her breast to see 
it. There they all were, her old schoolfellows, with their horses and their cars 



Burmese Days 129 

and their husbands in the cavalry; and here she, tied to that dreadful job, that 
dreadful pension, her dreadful mother! Was it possible that there was no 
escape? Could she be doomed forever to this sordid meanness, with no hope of 
ever getting back to the decent world again? 

It was not unnatural, with the example of her mother before her eyes, that 
Elizabeth should have a healthy loathing of Art. In fact, any excess of 
intellect-‘braininess’ was her word for it-tended to belong, in her eyes, to the 
‘beastly’. Real people, she felt, decent people-people who shot grouse, went to 
Ascot, yachted at Cowes-were not brainy. They didn’t go in for this nonsense 
of writing books and fooling with paintbrushes; and all these Highbrow 
ideas- Socialism and all that. ‘Highbrow’ was a bitter word in her vocabulary. 
And when it happened, as it did once or twice, that she met a veritable artist 
who was willing to work penniless all his life, rather than sell himself to a bank 
or an insurance company, she despised him far more than she despised the 
dabblers of her mother’s circle. That a man should turn deliberately away from 
all that was good and decent, sacrifice himself for a futility that led nowhere, 
was shameful, degrading, evil. She dreaded spinsterhood, but she would have 
endured it a thousand lifetimes through rather than marry such a man. 

When Elizabeth had been nearly two years in Paris her mother died abruptly 
of ptomaine poisoning. The wonder was that she had not died of it sooner. 
Elizabeth was left with rather less than a hundred pounds in the world. Her 
uncle and aunt cabled at once from Burma, asking her to come out and stay 
with them, and saying that a letter would follow. 

Mrs Lackersteen had reflected for some time over the letter, her pen 
between her lips, looking down at the page with her delicate triangular face like 
a meditative snake. 

‘I suppose we must have her out here, at any rate for a year. What a bore! 
However, they generally marry within a year if they’ve any looks at all. What 
am I to say to the girl, Tom?’ 

‘Say? Oh, just say she’ll pick up a husband out here a damn sight easier than 
at home. Something of that sort, y’know.’ 

‘My dear Tom! What impossible things you say!’ 

Mrs Lackersteen wrote: 

Of course, this is a very small station and we are in the jungle a great deal of the time. I’m afraid 
you will find it dreadfully dull after the delights of Pans But really in some ways these small 
stations have their advantages for a young girl. She finds herself quite a queen m the local society. 
The unmarried men are so lonely that they appreciate a girl’s society in a quite wonderful way, 
etc., etc. 

Elizabeth spent thirty pounds on summer frocks and set sail immediately. 
The ship, heralded by rolling porpoises, ploughed across the Mediterranean 
and down the Canal into a sea of staring, enamel-like blue, then out into the 
green wastes of the Indian Ocean, where flocks of flying fish skimmed in terror 
from the approaching hull. At night the waters were phosphorescent, and the 
wash of the bow was like a moving arrowhead of green fire. Elizabeth ‘loved’ 
the life on board ship. She loved the dancing on deck at nights, the cocktails 



1 30 Burmese Days 

which every man on board seemed anxious to buy for her, the deck games, of 
which, however, she grew tired at about the same time as the other members of 
the younger set. It was nothing to her that her mother’s death was only two 
months past. She had never cared greatly for her mother, and besides, the 
people here knew nothing of her affairs. It was so lovely after those two 
graceless years to breathe the air of wealth again. Not that most of the people 
here were rich; but on board ship everyone behaves as though he were rich. 
She was going to love India, she knew She had formed quite a picture of India, 
from the other passengers’ conversation; she had even learned some of the 
more necessary Hindustani phrases, such as ‘ idher ao’, ‘ 'jaldi ‘ sahiblog etc. In 
anticipation she tasted the agreeable atmosphere of Clubs, with punkahs 
flapping and barefooted white-turbaned boys reverently salaaming; and 
maidans where bronzed Englishmen with little clipped moustaches galloped to 
and fro, whacking polo balls It was almost as nice as being really rich, the way 
people lived in India. 

They sailed into Colombo through green glassy waters, where turtles and 
black snakes floated basking. A fleet of sampans came racing out to meet the 
ship, propelled by coal-black men with lips stained redder than blood by betel 
juice. They yelled and struggled round the gangway while the passengers 
descended. As Elizabeth and her friends came down, two sampan-wallahs, 
their prows nosing against the gangway, besought them with yells 

‘Don’t you go with him, missiel Not with him! Bad wicked man he, not fit 
taking missie!’ 

‘Don’t you listen him lies, missie! Nasty low fellow! Nasty low tricks him 
playing. Nasty native tricks!’ 

‘Ha, ha! He is not native himself! Oh no! Him European man, white skin all 
same, missie! Ha ha!’ 

‘Stop your bat , you two, or I’ll fetch one of you a kick,’ said the husband of 
Elizabeth’s friend-he was a planter. They stepped into one of the sampans and 
were rowed towards the sun-bright quays. And the successful sampan- wallah 
turned and discharged at his rival a mouthful of spittle which he must have 
been saving up for a very long time. 

This was the Orient. Scents of coco-nut oil and sandalwood, cinnamon and 
turmeric, floated across the water on the hot, swimming air. Elizabeth’s friends 
drove her out to Mount Lavinia, where they bathed in a lukewarm sea that 
foamed like Coca-Cola. She came back to the ship in the evening, and they 
reached Rangoon a week later. 

North of Mandalay the train, fuelled with wood, crawled at twelve miles an 
hour across a vast, parched plain, bounded at its remote edges by blue rings of 
hills. White egrets stood pbised, motionless, like herons, and piles of drying 
chilis gleamed crimson in the sun. Sometimes a white pagoda rose from the 
plain like the breast of a supine giantess. The early tropic night settled down, ' 
and the train jolted on, slowly, stopping at little stations where barbaric yells 
sounded from the darkness. Half-naked men with their long hair knotted 
behind their heads moved to and fro in torchlight, hideous as demons in 
Elizabeth’s eyes. The train plunged into forest, and unseen branches brushed 



Burmese Days 131 

against the windows. It was about nine o’clock when they reached Kyauktada, 
where Elizabeth’s uncle and aunt were waiting with Mr Macgregor’s car, and 
with some servants carrying torches. Her aunt came forward and took 
Elizabeth’s shoulders in her delicate, saurian hands. 

‘I suppose you are our niece Elizabeth? We are so pleased to see you,’ she 
said, and kissed her. 

Mr Lackersteen peered over his wife’s shoulder in the torchlight. He gave a 
half-whistle, exclaimed, ‘Well, I’ll be damned!’ and then seized Elizabeth and 
kissed her, more warmly than he need have done, she thought. She had never 
seen either of them before. 

After dinner, under the punkah in the drawing-room, Elizabeth and her 
aunt had a talk together Mr Lackersteen was strolling in the garden, 
ostensibly to smell the frangipani, actually to have a surreptitious drink that 
one of the servants smuggled to him from the back of the house. 

‘My dear, how really lovely you are! Let me look at you again.’ She took her 
by the shoulders. ‘I do think that Eton crop suits you. Did you have it done in 
Paris?’ 

‘Yes. Everyone was getting Eton-cropped. It suits you if you’ve got a fairly 
small head.’ 

‘Lovely! And those tortoise-shell spectacles-such a becoming fashion! I’m 
told that all the-er-demi-mondaines in South America have taken to wearing 
them. I’d no idea I had such a ravishing beauty for a niece. How old did you say 
you were, dear?’ 

‘Twenty-two.’ 

‘Twenty-two! How delighted all the men will be when we take you to the 
Club tomorrow! They get so lonely, poor things, never seeing a new face. And 
you were two whole years in Paris? I can’t think what the men there can have 
been about to let you leave unmarried.’ 

‘I’m afraid I didn’t meet many men, Aunt. Only foreigners. We had to live 
so quietly. And I was working,’ she added, thinking this rather a disgraceful 
admission. 

‘Of course, of course,’ sighed Mrs Lackersteen. ‘One hears the same thing 
on every side. Lovely girls having to work for their living. It is such a shame! I 
think it’s so terribly selfish, don’t you, the way these men remain unmarried 
while there are so many poor girls looking for husbands?’ Elizabeth not 
answering this, Mrs Lackersteen added with ano'ther sigh, ‘I’m sure if I were a 
young girl I’d marry anybody, literally anybody V 

The two women’s eyes met. There was a great deal that Mrs Lackersteen 
wanted to say, but she had no intention of doing more than hint at it obliquely. 
A great deal of her conversation was carried on by hints; she generally 
contrived, however, to make her meaning reasonably clear. She said in a 
tenderly impersonal tone, as though discussing a subject of general interest: 

‘Of course, I must say this. There are cases when, if girls fail to get married 
it’s their own fault. It happens even out here sometimes. Only a short time ago I 
remember a case-a girl came out and stayed a whole year with hex brother, and 
she had offers from all kinds of men-policemen, forest officers, men in timber 



7 22 Burmese Days 

firms with Quite good prospects. And she refused them all; she wanted to marry 
into the I.C.S., I heard. Well, what do you expect? Of course her brother 
couldn’t go on keeping her forever. And now I hear she’s at home, poor thing, 
working as a kmd of lady help, practically a servant. And getting only fifteen 
shillings a week! Isn’t it dreadful to think of such things?’ 

‘Dreadful!’ Elizabeth echoed. 

No more was said on this subject. In the morning, after she came back from 
Flory’s house, Elizabeth was describing her adventure to her aunt and uncle. 
They were at breakfast, at the flower-laden table, with the punkah flapping 
overhead and the tall stork-like Mohammedan butler in his white suit and 
pagri standing behind Mrs Lacker steen’s chair, tray in hand. 

‘And oh, Aunt, such an interesting thing! A Burmese girl came on to the 
veranda. I’d never seen one before, at least, not knowing they were girls. Such 
a queer little thing- she was almost like a doll with her round yellow face and 
her black hair screwed up on top. She only looked about seventeen. Mr Flory 
said she was his laundress.’ 

The Indian butler’s long body stiffened. He squinted down at the girl with 
his white eyeballs large in his black face. He spoke English well. Mr 
Lackersteen paused with a forkful of fish half-way from his plate and his crass 
mouth open. 

‘Laundress?’ he said. ‘Laundress! I say, dammit, some mistake there! No 
such thing as a laundress in this country, y’know. Laundering work’s all done 
by men. If you ask me-’ 

And then he stopped very suddenly, almost as though someone had trodden 
on his toe under the table. 


8 


That evening Flory told Ko S’la to send for the barber-he was the only barber 
in the town, an Indian, and he made a living by shaving the Indian coolies at 
the rate of eight annas a month for a dry shave every other day. The Europeans 
patronized him for lack of any other. The barber was waiting on the veranda 
when Flory came back from tennis, and Flory sterilized the scissors with 
boiling water and Condy’s fluid and had his hair cut. 

‘Lay out my best Palm Beach suit,’ he told Ko S’la, ‘and a silk shirt and my 
sambhur-skin shoes. Also that new tie that came from Rangoon last week.’ 

T have done so, thakin / said Ko S’la, meaning that he would do so. When 
Flory came into the bedroom he found Ko S’la waiting beside the clothes he 
had laid out, with a faintly sulky air. It was immediately apparent that Ko S’la 
knew why Flory was dressing himself up (that is, in hopes of meeting 
Elizabeth) and that he disapproved of it. 



Burmese Days J 33 

‘What are you waiting for?’ Flory said. 

‘To help you dress, thakinJ 

‘I shall dress myself this evening. You can go. 5 

He was going to shave-the second time that day-and he did not want Ko 
S’la to see him take shaving things into the bathroom. It was several years since 
he had shaved twice in one day. What providential luck that he had sent for 
that new tie only last week, he thought. He dressed himself very carefully, and 
spent nearly a quarter of an hour in brushing his hair, which was stiff and 
would never lie down after it had been cut. 

Almost the next moment, as it seemed, he was walking with Elizabeth down 
the bazaar road. He had found her alone in the Club ‘library’, and with a 
sudden burst of courage asked her to come out with him; and she had come 
with a readiness that surprised him; not even stopping to say anything to her 
uncle and aunt. He had lived so long m Burma, he had forgotten English ways. 
It was very dark under the peepul trees of the bazaar road, the foliage hiding 
the quarter moon, but the stars here and there in a gap blazed white and low, 
like lamps hanging on invisible threads. Successive waves of scent came 
rolling, first the cloying sweetness of frangipani, then a cold putrid stench of 
dung or decay from the huts opposite Dr Veraswami’s bungalow. Drums were 
throbbing a little distance away. 

As he heard the drums Flory remembered that a pzve was being acted a little 
farther down the road, opposie U Po Kyin’s house; in fact, it was U Po Kyin 
who had made arrangements for the pzve , though someone else had paid for it. 
A daring thought occurred to Flory. He would take Elizabeth to the pzvel She 
would love it-she must; no one with eyes in his head could resist a pzve- dance. 
Probably there would be a scandal when they came back to the Club together 
after a long absence; but damn it! what did it matter? She was different from 
that herd of fools at the Club. And it would be such fun to go to the pzve 
together! At this moment the music burst out with a fearful pandemonium-a 
strident squeal of pipes, a rattle like castanets and the hoarse thump of drums, 
above which a man’s voice was brassily squalling. 

‘Whatever is that noise?’ said Elizabeth, stopping. ‘It sounds just like a jazz 
band!’ 

‘Native music. They’re having a pwe-that’s a kind of Burmese play; a cross 
between a historical drama and a revue, if you can imagine that. It’ll interest 
you, I think. Just round the bend of the road here.’ 

‘Oh,’ she said rather doubtfully. 

They came round the bend into a glare of light. The whole road for thirty 
yards was blocked by the audience watching the pzve. At the back there was a 
raised stage, under humming petrol lamps, with the orchestra squalling and 
banging in front of it; on the stage two men dressed in clothes that reminded 
Elizabeth of Chinese pagodas were posturing with curved swords in their 
hands. All down the roadway it was a sea of white muslin backs of women, pink 
scarves flung round their shoulders and black hair-cylinders. A few sprawled 
on their mats, fast asleep. An old Chinese with a tray of peanuts was threading 
his way through the crowd, intoning mournfully, ‘ Myaype ! MyaypeP 



134 Burmese Days 

‘We’ll stop and watch a few minutes if you like/ Flory said. 

The blaze of lights and the appalling din of the orchestra had almost dazed 
Elizabeth, but what startled her most of all was the sight of this crowd of 
people sitting in the road as though it had been the pit of a theatre. 

‘Do they always have their plays in the middle of the road?’ she said. 

‘As a rule. They put up a rough stage and take it down in the morning. The 
show lasts all night.’ 

‘But are they allowed to-blocking up the whole roadway?’ 

‘Oh yes. There are no traffic regulations here. No traffic to regulate, you see.’ 

It struck her as very queer. By this time almost the entire audience had 
turned round on their mats to stare at the ‘Ingaleikma’. There were half a 
dozen chairs in the middle of the crowd, where some clerks and officials were 
sitting. U Po Kyin was among them, and he was making efforts to twist his 
elephantine body round and greet the Europeans. As the music stopped the 
pock-marked Ba Taik came hastening through the crowd and shikoed low to 
Flory, with his timorous air. 

‘Most holy one, my master U Po Kyin asks whether you and the young white 
lady will not come and watch our pwe for a few minutes. He has chairs ready 
for you.’ 

‘They’re asking us to come and sit down,’ Flory said to Elizabeth. ‘Would 
you like to? It’s rather fun. Those two fellows will clear off in a moment and 
there’ll be some dancing. If it wouldn’t bore you for a few minutes?’ 

Elizabeth felt very doubtful. Somehow it did not seem right or even safe to 
go in among that smelly native crowd. However, she trusted Flory, who 
presumably knew what was proper, and allowed him to lead her to the chairs. 
The Burmans made way on their mats, gazing after her and chattering; her 
shins brushed against warm, muslin-clad bodies, there was a feral reek of 
sweat. U Po Kyin leaned over towards her, bowing as well as he could and 
saying nasally: 

‘Kindly to sit down, madam! I am most honoured to make your 
acquaintance. Good evening. Good morning, Mr Flory, sir! A most 
unexpected pleasure. Had we known that you were to honour us with your 
company, we would have provided whiskies and other European refresh- 
ments. Ha ha!’ 

He laughed, and his betel-reddened teeth gleamed in the lamplight like red 
tinfoil. He was so vast and so hideous that Elizabeth could not help shrinking 
from him. A slender youth in a purple longyi was bowing to her and holding 
out a tray with two glasses of yellow sherbet, iced. U Po Kyin clapped his 
hands sharply, c Hey haunggalay!’ he called to a boy beside him. He gave some 
instructions in Burmese, and the boy pushed his way to the edge of the stage. 

‘He’s telling them to bring on their best dancer in our honour,’ Flory said. 
‘Look, here she comes.’ 

A girl who had been squatting at the back of the stage, smoking, stepped 
forward into the lamplight. She was very young, slim-shouldered, breastless, 
dressed in a pale blue satin longyi that hid her feet. The skirts of Her ingyi 
curved outwards above hex hips in little panniers, according to the ancient 



Burmese Days 13 5 

Burmese fashion. They were like the petals of a downward-pointing flower. 
She threw her cigar languidly to one of the men in the orchestra, and then, 
holding out one slender arm, writhed it as though to shake the muscles loose 

The orchestra burst into a sudden loud squalling. There were pipes like 
bagpipes, a strange instrument consisting of plaques of bamboo which a man 
struck with a little hammer, and in the middle there was a man surrounded by 
twelve tall drums of different sizes. He reached rapidly from one to another, 
thumping them with the heel of his hand. In a moment the girl began to dance. 
But at first it was not a dance, it was a rhythmic nodding, posturing and 
twisting of the elbows, like the movements of one of those jointed wooden 
figures on an old-fashioned roundabout The way her neck and elbows rotated 
was precisely like a jointed doll, and yet incredibly sinuous. Her hands, 
twisting like snakeheads with the fingers close together, could lie back until 
they were almost along her forearms. By degrees her movements quickened. 
She began to leap from side to side, flinging herself down in a kind of curtsy 
and springing up again with extraordinary agility, in spite of the long longyi 
that imprisoned her feet Then she danced in a grotesque posture as though 
sitting down, knees bent, body leaned forward, with her arms extended and 
writhing, her head also moving to the beat of the drums. The music quickened 
to a climax. The girl rose upright and whirled round as swiftly as a top, the 
pannier of her ingyi flying out about her like the petals of a snowdrop. Then the 
music stopped as abruptly as it had begun, and the girl sank again into a curtsy, 
amid raucous shouting from the audience. 

Elizabeth watched the dance with a mixture of amazement, boredom and 
something approaching horror. She had sipped her drink and found that it 
tasted like hair oil. On a mat by her feet three Burmese girls lay fast asleep with 
their heads on the same pillow, their small oval faces side by side like the faces 
of kittens. Under cover of the music Flory was speaking in a low voice into 
Elizabeth’s ear commenting on the dance. 

T knew this would interest you; that’s why I brought you here. You’ve read 
books and been in civilized places, you’re not like the rest of us miserable 
savages here. Don’t you think this is worth watching, in its queer way? Just 
look at that girl’s movements-look at that strange, bent-forward pose like a 
marionette, and the way her arms twist from the elbow like a cobra rising to 
strike. It’s grotesque, it’s even ugly, with a sort of wilful ugliness. And there’s 
something sinister in it too. There’s a touch of the diabolical in all Mongols. 
And yet when you look closely, what art, what centuries of culture you can see 
behind it! Every movement that girl makes has been studied and handed down 
through innumerable generations. Whenever you look closely at the art of 
these Eastern peoples you can see that- a civilization stretching back and back, 
practically the same, into times when we were dressed in woad. In some way 
that I can’t define to you, the whole life and spirit of Burma is summed up in 
the way that girl twists her arms. When you see her you can see the rice fields, 
the villages under the teak trees,, the pagodas, the priests in their yellow robes, 
the buffaloes swimming the rivers in the early morning, Thibaw’s palace-’ 

His voice stopped abruptly as the music stopped. There were certain things, 



j ^6 Burmese Days 

and a pwe - dance was one of them, that pricked him to talk discursively and 
incautiously; but now he realized that he had only been talking like a character 
in a novel, and not a very good novel. He looked away. Elizabeth had listened 
to him with a chill of discomfort. What was the man talking about? was her first 
thought. Moreover, she had caught the hated word Art more than once. For 
the first time she remembered that Flory was a total stranger and that it had 
been unwise to come out with him alone. She looked round her, at the sea of 
dark faces and the lurid glare of the lamps; the strangeness of the scene almost 
frightened her. What was she doing in this place? Surely it was not right to be 
sitting among the black people like this, almost touching them, in the scent of 
their garlic and their sweat? Why was she not back at the Club with the other 
white people? Why had he brought her here, among this horde of natives, to 
watch this hideous and savage spectacle? 

The music struck up, and the pwe girl began dancing again. Her face was 
powdered so thickly that it gleamed in the lamplight like a chalk mask with live 
eyes behind it. With that dead-white oval face and those wooden gestures she 
was monstrous, like a demon. The music changed its tempo, and the girl began 
to sing in a brassy voice. It was a song with a swift trochaic rhythm, gay yet 
fierce. The crowd took it up, a hundred voices chanting the harsh syllables in 
unison. Still in that strange bent posture the girl turned round and danced 
with her buttocks protruded towards the audience. Her silk longyi gleamed like 
metal. With hands and elbows still rotating she wagged her posterior from side 
to side. Then-astonishing feat, quite visible through the longyi— she began to 
wriggle her two buttocks independently in time with the music. 

There was a shout of applause from the audience. The three girls asleep on 
the mat woke up at the same moment and began clapping their hands wildly. A 
clerk shouted nasally ‘Bravo! Bravo!’ in English for the Europeans’ benefit. 
But U Po Kyin frowned and waved his hand. He knew all about European 
women. Elizabeth, however, had already stood up. 

Tm going. It’s time we were back,’ she said abruptly. She was looking away, 
but Flory could see that her face was pink. 

He stood up beside her, dismayed. ‘But, I say! Couldn’t you stay a few 
minutes longer? I know it’s late, but-they brought this girl on two hours 
before she was due, in our honour. Just a few minutes?’ 

‘I can’t help it, I ought to have been back ages ago. I don’t know what my 
uncle and aunt will be thinking.’ 

She began at once to pick her way through the crowd, and he followed her, 
with not even time to thank the pwe people for their trouble. The Burmans 
made way with a sulky air. How like these English people, to upset everything 
by sending for the best dancer and then go away almost before she had started! 
There was a fearful row as soon as Flory and Elizabeth had gone, the pwe girl 
refusing to go on with her dance and the audience demanding that she should 
continue. However, peace was restored when two clowns hurried on to the 
stage and began letting off crackers and making obscene jokes. 

Flory followed the girl abjectly up the road. She was walking quickly, her 
head turned away, and for some moments she would not speak. What a thing to 



Burmese Days 137 

happen, when they had been getting on so well together! He kept trying to 
apologize. 

‘ I’m so sorry! I’d no idea you’d mind-’ 

‘It’s nothing. What is there to be sorry about? I only said it was time to go 
back, that’s all.’ 

‘I ought to have thought. One gets not to notice that kind of thing in this 
country. These people’s sense of decency isn’t the same as ours-it’s stricter m 
some ways-but-’ 

‘It’s not that! It’s not that!’ she exclaimed quite angrily. 

He saw that he was only making it worse. They walked on in silence, he 
behind. He was miserable. What a bloody fool he had been! And yet all the 
while he had no inkling of the real reason why she was angry with him. It was 
not the pwe girl’s behaviour, in itself, that had offended her; it had only 
brought things to a head. But the whole expedition-the very notion of wanting 
to rub shoulders with all those smelly natives-had impressed her badly. She 
was perfectly certain that that was not how white men ought to behave. And 
that extraordinary rambling speech that he had begun, with all those long 
words-almost, she thought bitterly, as though he were quoting poetry! It was 
how those beastly artists that you met sometimes in Paris used to talk. She had 
thought him a manly man till this evening. Then her mind went back to the 
morning’s adventure, and how he had faced the buffalo barehanded, and some 
of her anger evaporated. By the time they reached the Club gate she felt 
inclined to forgive him. Flory had by now plucked up courage to speak again. 
He stopped, and she stopped too, in a patch where the boughs let through 
some starlight -and he could see her face dimly. 

‘I say. I say, I do hope you’re not really angry about this?’ 

‘No, of course I’m not. I told you I wasn’t.’ 

‘I oughtn’t to have taken you there. Please forgive me. Do you know, I don’t 
think I’d tell the others where you’ve been. Perhaps it would be better to say 
you’ve just been out for a stroll, out in the garden- something like that. They 
might think it queer, a white girl going to a pwe. I don’t think I’d tell them.’ 

‘Oh, of course I won’t!’ she agreed with a warmness that surprised him. 
After that he knew that he was forgiven. But what it was that he was forgiven, 
he had not yet grasped. 

They went into the Club separately, by tacit consent. The expedition had 
been a failure, decidedly. There was a gala air about the Club lounge tonight. 
The entire European community were waiting to greet Elizabeth, and the 
butler and the six chakras, in their best starched white suits, were drawn up on 
either side of the door, smiling and salaaming. When the Europeans had 
finished their greetings the butler came forward with a vast garland of flowers 
that the servants had prepared for the ‘missiesahib’. Mr Macgregor made a 
very humorous speech of welcome, introducing everybody. He introduced 
Maxwell as ‘our local arboreal specialist’, Westfield as ‘the guardiih of law and 
order and-ah- terror of the local banditti’, and so on and so forth. There was 
much laughter. The sight of a pretty girl’s face had put everyone in such a good 
humour that they could even enjoy Mr Macgregor’s speech-which, to tell the 



j j g Burmese Days 

truth, he had spent most of the evening in preparing. 

At the first possible moment Ellis, with a sly air, took Flory and Westfield by 
the arm and drew them away into the card-room. He was in a much better 
mood than usual. He pinched Flory’s arm with his small, hard fingers, 
painfully but quite amiably. 

‘Well, my lad, everyone’s been looking for you. Where have you been all this 
time?’ 

‘Oh, only for a stroll.’ 

‘For a stroll! And who with?’ 

‘With Miss Lackersteen.’ 

‘I knew it! So you're the bloody fool who’s fallen into the trap, are you? You 
swallowed the bait before anyone else had time to look at it. I thought you were 
too old a bird for that, by God I did!’ 

‘What do you mean?’ 

‘Mean! Look at him pretending he doesn’t know what I mean! Why, I mean 
that Ma Lackersteen’ s marked you down for her beloved nephew-in-law, of 
course. That is, if you aren’t bloody careful. Eh, Westfield?’ 

‘Quite right, ol’ boy. Eligible young bachelor. Marriage halter and all that. 
They’ve got their eye on him.’ 

‘I don’t know where you’re getting this idea from. The girl’s hardly been 
here twenty-four hours.’ 

‘Long enough for you to take her up the garden path, anyway. You watch 
your step. Tom Lackersteen may be a drunken sot, but he’s not such a bloody 
fool that he wants a mece hanging round his neck for the rest of his life. And of 
course she knows which side her bread’s buttered. So you take care and don’t 
go putting your head into the noose.’ 

‘Damn it, you’ve no right to talk about people like that. After all, the girl’s 
only a kid-’ 

‘My dear old ass’-Ellis, almost affectionate now that he had anew subject 
for scandal, took Flory by the coat lapel-‘my dear, dear old ass, don’t you go 
filling yourself up with moonshine. You think that girl’s easy fruit: she’s not. 
These girls out from home are all the same. “Anything in trousers but nothing 
this side the altar”-that’s their motto, every one of them. Why do you think 
the girl’s come out here?’ 

‘Why? I don’t know. Because she wanted to, I suppose.’ 

‘My good fool! She come out to lay her claws into a husband, of course. As if 
it wasn’t well known! When a girl’s failed everywhere else she tries India, 
where every man’s pining for the sight of a white woman. The Indian 
marriage -market, they call it. Meat market it ought to be. Shiploads of ’em 
coming out every year like carcasses of frozen mutton, to be pawed over by 
nasty old bachelors like you. Cold storage. Juicy joints straight from the ice.’ 
‘You do say some repulsive things.’ 

‘Best, pasture-fed English meat,’ said Ellis with a pleased air. ‘Fresh 
consignments. Warranted prime condition.’ 

He went through a pantomime of-examining a joint of meat, with goatish 
sniffs. This joke was likely to last .Ellis a long time; his jokes usually did; and 



Burmese Days 139 

there was nothing that gave him quite so keen a pleasure as dragging a woman’s 
name through mud. 

Flory did not see much more of Elizabeth that evening. Everyone was in the 
lounge together, and there was the silly clattering chatter about nothing that 
there is on these occasions. Flory could never keep up that kind of conversation 
for long. But as for Elizabeth, the civilized atmosphere of the Club, with the 
white faces all round her and the friendly look of the illustrated papers and the 
‘Bonzo’ pictures, reassured her after that doubtful interlude at the pwe. 

When the Lackersteens left the Club at nine, it was not Flory but Mr 
Macgregor who walked home with them, ambling beside Elizabeth like some 
friendly saurian monster, among the faint crooked shadows of the gold mohur 
stems. The Prome anecdote, and many another, found a new home. Any 
newcomer to Kyauktada was apt to come in for rather a large share of Mr 
Macgregor’ s conversation, for the others looked on him as an unparalleled 
bore, and it was a tradition at the Club to interrupt his stories. But Elizabeth 
was by nature a good listener. Mr Macgregor thought he had seldom met so 
intelligent a girl. 

Flory stayed a little longer at the Club, drinking with the others. There was 
much smutty talk about Elizabeth. The quarrel about Dr Veras wami’s election 
had been shelved for the time being. Also, the notice that Ellis had put up on 
the previous evening had been taken down. Mr Macgregor had seen it during 
his morning visit to the Club, and in his fair-minded way he had at once 
insisted on its removal. So the notice had been suppressed; not, however, 
before it had achieved its object. 


9 


During the next fortnight a great deal happened. 

The feud between U Po Kyin and Dr Veras warni was now in full swing. The 
whole town was divided into two factions, with every native soul from the 
magistrates down to the bazaar sweepers enrolled on one side or the other, and 
all ready for perjury when the time came. But of the two parties, the doctor’s 
was much the smaller and less efficiently libellous. The editor of the Burmese 
Patriot had been put on trial for sedition and libel, bail being refused. His 
arrest had provoked a small riot in Rangoon, which was suppressed by the 
police with the death of only two rioters. In prison the editor went on hunger 
strike, but broke down after six hours. 

In Kyauktada, too, things had been happening. A dacoit named Nga Shwe 
O had escaped from the jail in mysterious circumstances. And there had been a 
whole crop of rumours about a projected native rising in the district. The 
rumours-they were very vague ones as yet-centred round a village named 



j^o Burmese Days 

Thongwa, not far from the camp where Maxwell was girdling teak. A weiksa , 
or magician, was said to have appeared from nowhere and to be prophesying 
the doom of the English power and distributing magic bullet-proof jackets. Mr 
Macgregor did not take the rumours very seriously, but he had asked for an 
extra force of Military Police. It was said that a company of Indian infantry 
with a British officer in command would be sent to Kyauktada shortly. 
Westfield, of course, had hurried to Thongwa at the first threat, or rather hope, 
of trouble. 

‘God, if they’d only break out and rebel properly for once!’ he said to Ellis 
before starting. ‘But it’ll be a bloody washout as usual. Always the same story 
with these rebellions-peter out almost before they’ve begun. Would you 
believe it, I’ve never fired my gun at a fellow yet, not even a dacoit. Eleven 
years of it, not counting the War, and never killed a man. Depressing.’ 

‘Oh, well,’ said Ellis, ‘if they won’t come up to the scratch you can always get 
hold of the ringleaders and give them a good bambooing on the Q.T. That’s 
better than coddling them up in our damned nursing homes of prisons.’ 

‘H’m, probably. Can’t do it though, nowadays. All these kid-glove laws-got 
to keep them, I suppose, if we’re fools enough to make ’em.’ 

‘Oh, rot the laws. Bambooing’s the only thing that makes any impression on 
the Burman. Have you seen them after they’ve been flogged? I have. Brought 
out of the jail on bullock carts, yelling, with the women plastering mashed 
bananas on their backsides. That’s something they do understand. If I had my 
way I’d give it ’em on the soles of the feet the same as the Turks do.’ 

‘Ah well. Let’s hope they’ll have the guts to show a bit of fight for once. 
Then we’ll call out the Military Police, rifles and all. Plug a few dozen of 
’em-that’ll clear the air.’ 

However, the hoped-for opportunity did not come. Westfield and the dozen 
constables he had taken with him to Thongwa-jolly round-faced Gurkha 
boys, pining to use their kukris on somebody-found the district depressingly 
peaceful. There seemed not the ghost of a rebellion anywhere; only the annual 
attempt, as regular as the monsoon, of the villagers to avoid paying the 
capitation tax. 

The weather was growing hotter and hotter. Elizabeth had had her first 
attack of prickly heat. Tennis at the Club had practically ceased; people would 
play one languid set and then fall into chairs and swallow pints of tepid lime- 
juice-tepid, because the ice came only twice weekly from Mandalay and 
melted within twenty-four hours of arriving. The Flame of the Forest was in 
full bloom. The Burmese women, to protect their children from the sun, 
streaked their faces with yellow cosmetic until they looked like little African 
witch-doctors. Flocks of green pigeons, and imperial pigeons as large as ducks, 
came to eat the berries of the big peepul trees along the bazaar road. 
Meanwhile, Flory had turned Ma Hla May out of his house. 

A nasty, dirty job! There was a sufficient pretext-she had stolen his gold 
cigarette-case and pawned it at the house of Li Yeik, the Chinese grocer and 
illicit pawnbroker in the bazaar-but still, it was only a pretext. Flory knew 
perfectly well, and Ma Hla May knew, and all the servants knew, that he was 



Burmese Days 141 

getting rid of her because of Elizabeth. Because of ‘the Ingaleikma with dyed 
hair’, as Ma Hla May called her. 

Ma Hla May made no violent scene at first. She stood sullenly listening 
while he wrote her a cheque for a hundred rupees-Li Yeik or the Indian chetty 
in the bazaar would cash cheques-and told her that she was dismissed. He was 
more ashamed than she; he could not look her in the face, and his voice went 
flat and guilty. When the bullock cart came for her belongings, he shut himself 
in the bedroom skulking till the scene should be over. 

Cartwheels grated on the drive, there was the sound of men shouting; then 
suddenly there was a fearful uproar of screams. Flory went outside. They were 
all struggling round the gate in the sunlight. Ma Hla May was clinging to the 
gatepost and Ko S’la was trying to bundle her out. She turned a face full of 
fury and despair towards Flory, screaming over and over, ‘ Thakin ! Thakin ! 
Thakin! Thakin! Thakin! 5 It hurt him to the heart that she should still call him 
thakin after he had dismissed her. 

‘What is it?’ he said. 

It appeared that there was a switch of false hair that Ma Hla May and Ma Yi 
both claimed. Flory gave the switch to Ma Yi and gave Ma Hla May two 
rupees to compensate her. Then the cart jolted away, with Ma Hla May sitting 
beside her two wicker baskets, straight-backed and sullen, and nursing a kitten 
on her knees. It was only two months since he had given her the kitten as a 
present. 

Ko S’la, who had long wished for Ma Hla May’s removal, was not altogether 
pleased now that it had happened. He was even less pleased when he saw his 
master going to church-or as he called it, to the ‘English pagoda’-for Flory 
was still in Kyauktada on the Sunday of the padre’s arrival, and he went to 
church with the others. There was a congregation of twelve, including Mr 
Francis, Mr Samuel and six native Christians, with Mrs Lackersteen playing 
‘Abide with Me’ on the tiny harmonium with one game pedal. It was the first 
time in ten years that Flory had been to church, except to funerals. Ko S’la’s 
notions of what went on in the ‘English pagoda’ were vague in the extreme; but 
he did know that church-going signified respectability-a quality which, like all 
bachelors’ servants, he hated in his bones. 

‘There is trouble coming,’ he said despondently to the other servants. ‘I 
have been watching him (he meant Flory) these ten days past. He has cut down 
his cigarettes to fifteen a day, he has stopped drinking gin before breakfast, he 
shaves himself every evening-though he thinks I do not know it, the fool. And 
he has ordered half a dozen new silk shirts! I had to stand over the dirzi calling 
him bahinchut to get them finished in time. Evil omens! I give him three 
months longer, and then good-bye to the peace in this house!’ 

‘What, is he going to get married?’ said Ba Pe. 

‘I am certain of it. When a white man begins going to the English pagoda, it 
is, as you might say, the beginning of the end.’ 

‘I have had many masters in my life,’ old Sammy said. ‘The worst was 
Colonel Wimpole sahib, who used to make his orderly hold me down over the 
table while he came running from behind and kicked me with very thick boots 



jq 2 Burmese Days 

for serving banana fritters too frequently. At other times, when he was drunk, 
he would fire his revolver through the roof of the servants’ quarters, just above 
our heads. But I would sooner serve ten years under Colonal Wimpole sahib 
than a week under a memsahib with her kit-kit. If our master marries I shall 
leave the same day.’ 

‘I shall not leave, for I have been his servant fifteen years. But I know what is 
in store for us when that woman comes. She will shout at us because of spots of 
dust on the furniture, and wake us up to bring cups of tea in the afternoon 
when we are asleep, and come poking into the cookhouse at all hours and 
complain over dirty saucepans and cockroaches in the flour bin. It is my belief 
that these women He awake at nights thinking of new ways to torment their 
servants.’ 

‘They keep a little red book,’ said Sammy, ‘in which they enter the bazaar- 
money, two annas for this, four annas for that, so that a man cannot earn a pice. 
They make more kit-kit over the price of an onion than a sahib over five 
rupees.’ 

‘Ah, do I not know it! She will be worse than Ma Hla May. Women!’ he 
added comprehensively, with a kind of sigh. 

The sigh was echoed by the others, even by Ma Pu and Ma Yi. Neither took 
Ko S’la’s remarks as a stricture upon her own sex, Englishwomen being 
considered a race apart, possibly not even human, and so dreadful that an 
Englishman’s marriage is usually the signal for the flight of every servant in his 
house, even those who have been with him for years. 


10 


But as a matter of fact, Ko S’la’s alarm was premature. After knowing 
Elizabeth for ten days, Flory was scarcely more intimate with her than on the 
day when he had first met her. 

As it happened, he had her almost to himself during these ten days, most of 
the Europeans being in the jungle. Flory himself had no right to be loitering in 
headquarters, for at this time of year the work of timber-extraction was in full 
swing, and in his absence everything went to pieces under the incompetent 
Eurasian overseer. But he had stayed- pretext, a touch of fever-while 
despairing letters came almost every day from the overseer, telling of disasters. 
One of the elephants was ill, the engine of the light railway that was used for 
carrying teak logs to the river had broken down, fifteen of the coolies had 
deserted. But Flory still lingered, unable to tear himself away from Kyauktada 
while Elizabeth was there, and continually seeking-never, as yet, to much 
purpose-to recapture that easy and delightful friendship of their first meeting. 

They met every day, morning and evening, it was true. Each evening they 



Burmese Days 143 

played a single of tennis at the Club-Mrs Lackersteen was too limp and Mr 
Lackersteen too liverish for tennis at this time of year-and afterwards they 
would sit in the lounge, all four together, playing bridge and talking. But 
though Flory spent hours in Elizabeth’s company, and often they were alone 
together, he was never for an instant at his ease with her. They talked- so long 
as they talked of trivialities-with the utmost freedom, yet they were distant, 
like strangers. He felt stiff in her presence, he could not forget his birthmark; 
his twice-scraped chin smarted, his body tortured him for whisky and 
tobacco-for he tried to cut down his drinking and smoking when he was with 
her After ten days they seemed no nearer the relationship he wanted. 

For somehow, he had never been able to talk to her as he longed to talk. To 
talk, simply to talk! It sounds so little, and how much it is 1 When you have 
existed to the brink of middle age in bitter loneliness, among people to whom 
your true opinion on every subject on earth is blasphemy, the need to talk is the 
greatest of all needs. Yet with Elizabeth serious talk seemed impossible. It was 
as though there had been a spell upon them that made all their conversation 
lapse into banality; gramophone records, dogs, tennis racquets-all that 
desolating Club-chatter. She seemed not to want to talk of anything but that. 
He had only to touch upon a subject of any conceivable interest to hear the 
evasion, the C I shan’t play’, coming into her voice. Her taste in books appalled 
him when he discovered it. Yet she was young, he reminded himself, and had 
she not drunk white wine and talked of Marcel Proust under the Paris plane 
trees? Later, no doubt, she would understand him and give him the 
companionship he needed. Perhaps it was only that he had not won her 
confidence yet. 

He was anything but tactful with her. Like all men who have lived much 
alone, he adjusted himself better to ideas than to people. And so, though all 
their talk was superficial, he began to irritate her sometimes; not by what he 
said but by what he implied. There was an uneasiness between them, ill- 
defined and yet often verging upon quarrels. When two people, one of whom 
has lived long in the country while the other is a newcomer, are thrown 
together, it is inevitable that the first should act as cicerone to the second. 
Elizabeth, during these days, was making her first acquaintance with Burma; it 
was Flory, naturally, who acted as her interpreter, explaining this, 
commenting upon that. And the things he said, or the way he said them, 
provoked in her a vague yet deep disagreement. For she perceived that Flory, 
when he spoke of the ‘natives’, spoke nearly always in favour of them. He was 
forever praising Burmese customs and the Burmese character; he even went so 
far as to contrast them favourably with the English. It disquieted her. After all, 
natives were natives-interesting, no doubt, but finally only a ‘subject’ people, 
an inferior people with black faces. His attitude was a little too tolerant. Nor 
had he grasped, yet, in what way he was antagonizing her. He so wanted her to 
love Burma as he loved it, not to look at it with the dull, incurious eyes of a 
memsahib! He had forgotten that most people can be at ease in a foreign 
country only when they are disparaging the inhabitants. 

He was too eager in' his attempts to interest her in things Oriental. He tried 



jr^j. Burmese Days 

to induce her, for instance, to learn Burmese, but it came to nothing. (Her aunt 
had explained to her that only missionary-women spoke Burmese; nice women 
found kitchen Urdu quite as much as they needed.) There were countless 
small disagreements like that. She was grasping, dimly, that his views were not 
the views an Englishman should hold. Much more clearly she grasped that he 
was asking her to be fond of the Burmese, even to admire them; to admire 
people with black faces, almost savages, whose appearance still made her 
shudder! 

The subject cropped up in a hundred ways. A knot of Burmans would pass 
them on the road. She, with her still fresh eyes, would gaze after them, half 
curious and half repelled; and she would say to Flory, as she would have said to 
anybody: 

‘How revoltingly ugly these people are, aren’t they?’ 

‘ Are they? 1 always think they’re rather charming-looking, the Burmese. 
They have such splendid bodies! Look at that fellow’s shoulders-like a bronze 
statue. Just think what sights you’d see m England if people went about half 
naked as they do here!’ 

‘But they have such hideous-shaped heads! Their skulls kind of slope up 
behind like a tom-cat’s. And then the way their foreheads slant back-it makes 
them look so wicked. I remember reading something in a magazine about the 
shape of people’s heads; it said that a person with a sloping forehead is a 
criminal type' 

‘Oh, come, that’s a bit sweeping! Round about half the people in the world 
have that kind of forehead.’ 

‘Oh, well, if you count coloured people, of course-!’ 

Or perhaps a string of women would pass, going to the well: heavy-set 
peasant-girls, copper-brown, erect under their water-pots with strong 
marelike buttocks protruded. The Burmese women repelled Elizabeth more 
than the men; she felt her kinship with them, and the hatefulness of being kin 
to creatures with black faces. 

‘Aren’t they too simply dreadful? So coarse-looking; like some kind of 
animal. Do you think anyone could think those women attractive?’ 

‘Their own men do, I believe.’ 

‘I suppose they would. But that black skin- 1 don’t know how anyone could 
bear it!’ 

‘But, you know, one gets used to the brown skin in time. In fact they say-I 
believe it’s true-that after a few years in these countries a brown skin seems 
more natural than a white one. And after all, it is more natural. Take the world 
as a whole, it’s an eccentricity to be white.’ 

‘You do have some funny ideas!’ 

And so on and so on. She felt all the while an unsatisfactoriness, an 
unsoundness in the things he said. It was particularly so on the evening when 
Flory allowed Mr Francis and Mr Samuel, the two derelict Eurasians, to 
entrap ham in conversation at the Club gate. 

Elizabeth, as it happened, had reached the Chib a few minutes before, Flory, 
and when she heard his voice at the gate she came round the tennis-screen to 



Burmese Days 14s 

meet him. The two Eurasians had sidled up to Flory and cornered him like a 
pair of dogs asking for a game. Francis was doing most of the talking. He was a 
meagre, excitable man, and as brown as a cigar-leaf, being the son of a South 
Indian woman; Samuel, whose mother had been a Karen, was pale yellow with 
dull red hair. Both were dressed in shabby drill suits, with vast topis beneath 
which their slender bodies looked like the stalks of toadstools. 

Elizabeth came down the path in time to hear fragments of an enormous and 
complicated autobiography. Talking to white men- talking, for choice, about 
himself-was the great joy of Francis’s life. When, at intervals of months, he 
found a European to listen to him, his life-history would pour out of him m 
unquenchable torrents. He was talking in a nasal, sing-song voice of incredible 
rapidity: 

‘Of my father, sir, I remember little, but he was very choleric man and many 
whackings with big bamboo stick all knobs on both for self, little half-brother 
and two mothers. Also how on occasion of bishop’s visit little half-brother and 
I dress in longyis and sent among the Burmese children to preserve incognito. 
My father never rose to be bishop, sir. Four converts only in twenty-eight 
years, and also too great fondness for Chinese rice-spirit very fiery noised 
abroad and spoil sales of my father’s booklet entitled The Scourge of Alcohol , 
published with the Rangoon Baptist Press, one rupee eight annas. My little 
half-brother die one hot weather, always coughing, coughing,’ etc., etc. 

The two Eurasians perceived the presence of Elizabeth. Both doffed their 
topis with bows and brilliant displays of teeth. It was probably several years 
since either of them had had a chance of talking to an Englishwoman. Francis 
burst out more effusively than ever. He was chattering in evident dread that he 
would be interrupted and the conversation cut short. 

‘Good evening to you, madam, good evening, good evening! Most honoured 
to make your acquaintance, madam! Very sweltering is the weather these days, 
is not? But seasonable for April. Not too much you are suffering from prickly 
heat, I trust? Pounded tamarind applied to the afflicted spot is infallible. 
Myself I suffer torments each night. Very prevalent disease among we 
Europeans.’ 

He pronounced it Europian, like Mr Chollop in Martin Chuzzlewit 
Elizabeth did not answer. She was looking at the Eurasians somewhat coldly. 
She had only a dim idea as to who or what they were, and it struck her as 
impertinent that they should speak to her. 

‘Thanks, I’ll remember about the tamarind,’ Flory said. 

‘Specific of renowned Chinese doctor, sir. Also, sir-madam, may I advise to 
you, wearing only Terai hat is not judicious in April, sir. For the natives all 
well, their skulls are adamant. But for us sunstroke ever menaces. Very deadly 
is the sun upon European skull. But is it that I detain you, madam?’ 

This was said in a disappointed tone. Elizabeth had, in fact, decided to snub 
the Eurasians. She did not know why Flory was allowing them to hold him in 
conversation. As she turned away to stroll back to the tennis court, she made a 
practice stroke in the air with her racquet, to remind Flory that the game was 
overdue. He saw it and followed her, rather reluctantly, for he did not like 



j^S Burmese Days 

snubbing the wretched Francis, bore though he was. 

‘I must be off,’ he said. ‘Good evening, Francis. Good evening, Samuel.’ 
‘Good evening, sir! Good evening, madam' Good evening, good evening!’ 
They receded with more hat flourishes. 

‘Who are those two?’ said Elizabeth as Flory came up with her. ‘Such 
extraordinary creatures! They were in church on Sunday. One of them looks 
almost white. Surely he isn’t an Englishman?’ 

‘No, they’re Eurasians -sons of white fathers and native mothers. Yellow- 
bellies is our friendly nickname for them.’ 

‘But what are they doing here? Where do they live? Do they do any work?’ 
‘They exist somehow or other in the bazaar. I believe Francis acts as clerk to 
an Indian money-lender, and Samuel to some of the pleaders. But they’d 
probably starve now and then if it weren’t for the charity of the natives.’ 

‘The natives! Do you mean to say-sort of cadge from the natives?’ 

‘I fancy so. It would be a very easy thing to do, if one cared to. The Burmese 
won’t let anyone starve.’ 

Elizabeth had never heard of anything of this kind before. The notion of 
men who were at least partly white living in poverty among ‘natives’ so 
shocked her that she stopped short on the path, and the game of tennis was 
postponed for a few minutes. 

‘But how awful! I mean, it’s such a bad example! It’s almost as bad as if one 
of us was like that. Couldn’t something be done for those two? Get up a 
subscription and send them away from here, or something?’ 

‘I’m afraid it wouldn’t help much. Wherever they went they’d be in the 
same position.’ 

‘But couldn’t they get some proper work to do?’ 

‘I doubt it. You see, Eurasians of that type-men who’ve been brought up in 
the bazaar and had no education-are done for from the start. The Europeans 
won’t touch them with a stick, and they’re cut off from entering the lower- 
grade Government services. There’s nothing they can do except cadge, unless 
they chuck all pretension to being Europeans. And really you can’t expect the 
poor devils to do that. Their drop of white blood is the sole asset they’ve got. 
Poor Francis, I never meet him but he begins telling me about his prickly heat. 
Natives, you see, are supposed not to suffer from prickly heat^-bosh, of course, 
but people believe it. It’s the same with sunstroke. They wear those huge topis 
to remind you that they’ve got European skulls. A kind of coat of arms. The 
bend sinister, you might say.’ 

This did not satisfy Elizabeth. She perceived that Flory, as usual, had a 
sneaking sympathy with the Eurasians. And the appearance of the two men 
had excited a pecular dislike in her. She had placed their type now. They 
looked like dagoes. Like those Mexicans and Italians and other dago people 
who play the mauvais rdle in so many a film. 

‘They looked awfully degenerate types, didn’t they? So thin and weedy and 
cringing; and they haven’t got at all honest faces. I suppose these Eurasians are 
very degenerate? I’ve heard that half-castes always inherit what’s worst in both 
races. Is that true?’ 



Burmese Days 147 

‘I don’t know that it’s true. Most Eurasians aren’t very good specimens, and 
it’s hard to see how they could be, with their upbringing. But our attitude 
towards them is rather beastly. We always talk of them as though they’d 
sprung up from the ground like mushrooms, with all their faults ready-made. 
But when all’s said and done, we’re responsible for their existence.’ 

‘Responsible for their existence?’ 

‘Well, they’ve all got fathers, you see.’ 

‘Oh ... Of course there’s that. . . . But after all, you aren’t responsible. I 
mean, only a very low kind of man would- er-have anything to do with native 
women, wouldn’t he?’ 

‘Oh, quite. But the fathers of both those two were clergymen m holy orders, 
I believe.’ 

He thought of Rosa McFee, the Eurasian girl he had seduced in Mandalay in 
1913. The way he used to sneak down to the house in a gharry with the shutters 
down; Rosa’s corkscrew curls; her withered old Burmese mother, giving him 
tea in the dark living-room with the fern pots and the wicker divan. And 
afterwards, when he had chucked Rosa, those dreadful, imploring letters on 
scented note-paper, which, in the end, he had ceased opening. 

Elizabeth reverted to the subject of Francis and Samuel after tennis. 

‘Those two Eurasians— does anyone here have anything to do with them? 
Invite them to their houses or anything?’ 

‘Good gracious, no. They’re complete outcasts. It’s not considered quite the 
thing to talk to them, in fact. Most of us say good morning to them-Ellis won’t 
even do that.’ 

‘Butjyott talked to them.’ 

‘Oh well, I break the rules occasionally. I meant that a pukka sahib probably 
wouldn’t be seen talking to them. But you see, I try-just sometimes, when I 
have the pluck— nor to be a pukka sahib.’ 

It was an unwise remark. She knew very well by this time the meaning of the 
phrase ‘pukka sahib’ and all it stood for. His remark had made the difference in 
their viewpoint a little clearer. The glance she gave him was almost hostile, and 
curiously hard; for her face could look hard sometimes, in spite of its youth and 
its flower-like skin. Those modish tortoise-shell spectacles gave her a very self- 
possessed look.. Spectacles are queerly expressive things-almost more 
expressive, indeed, than eyes. 

As yet he had neither understood her nor quite won her trust. Yet on the 
surface, at least, things had not gone ill between them. He had fretted her 
sometimes, but the good impression that he had made that first morning was 
not yet effaced. It was a curious fact that she scarcely noticed his birthmark at 
this time. And there were some subjects on which she was glad to hear him 
talk. Shooting, for example-she seemed to have an enthusiasm for shooting 
that was remarkable in a girl. Horses, also; but he was less knowledgeable 
about horses. He had arranged to take her out for a day’s shooting, later, when 
he could make preparations. Both of them were looking forward to the 
expedition with some eagerness, though not entirely for the same reason. 



II 


Flory and Elizabeth walked down the bazaar road. It was morning, but the air 
was so hot that to walk in it was like wading through a torrid sea. Strings of 
Burmans passed, coming from the bazaar, on scraping sandals, and knots of 
girls who hurried by four and five abreast, with short quick steps, chattering, 
their burnished hair gleaming. By the roadside, just before you got to the jail, 
the fragments of a stone pagoda were littered, cracked and overthrown by the 
strong roots of a peepul tree. The angry carved faces of demons looked up from 
the grass where they had fallen. Near by another peepul tree had twined itself 
round a palm, uprooting it and bending it backwards in a wrestle that had 
lasted a decade. 

They walked on and came to the jail, a vast square block, two hundred yards 
each way, with shiny concrete walls twenty feet high. A peacock, pet of the jail, 
was mincing pigeon-toed along the parapet. Six convicts came by, head down, 
dragging two heavy handcarts piled with earth, under the guard of Indian 
warders. They were long-sentence men, with heavy limbs, dressed in uniforms 
of coarse white cloth with small dunces’ caps perched on their shaven crowns. 
Their faces were greyish, cowed and curiously flattened. Their leg-irons 
jingled with a clear ring. A woman came past carrying a basket of fish on her 
head. Two crows were circling round it and making darts at it, and the woman 
was flapping one hand negligently to keep them away. 

There was a din of voices a little distance away. ‘The bazaar’s just round the 
corner,’ Flory said. ‘I think this is a market morning. It’s rather fun to watch.’ 

He had asked her to come down to the bazaar with him, telling her it would 
amuse her to see it. They rounded the bend. The bazaar was an enclosure like a 
very large cattle pen, with low stalls, mostly palm-thatched, round its edge. In 
the enclosure, a mob of people seethed, shouting and jostling; the confusion of 
their multi-coloured clothes was like a cascade of hundreds-and-thousands 
poured out of a jar. Beyond the bazaar one could see the huge, miry river. Tree 
branches and long streaks of scum raced down it at seven miles an hour. By the 
bank a fleet of sampans, with sharp beak-like bows on which eyes were painted, 
rocked at their mooring-poles. 

Flory and Elizabeth stood watching for a moment. Files of women passed 
balancing vegetable baskets on their heads, and pop-eyed children who stared 
at the Europeans. An old Chinese in dungarees faded to sky-blue hurried by, 
nursing some unrecognizable, bloody fragment of a pig’s intestines. 

‘Let’s go and poke around the stalls a bit, shall we?’ Flory said. 



Burmese Days 149 

‘Is it all right going in among the crowd? Everything’s so horribly dirty.’ 

‘Oh, it’s all right, they’ll make way for us. It’ll interest you.’ 

Elizabeth followed him doubtfully and even unwillingly. Why was it that he 
always brought her to these places? Why was he forever dragging her in among 
the ‘natives’, trying to get her to take an interest in them and watch their filthy, 
disgusting habits? It was all wrong, somehow. However, she followed, not 
feeling able to explain her reluctance. A wave of stifling air met them; there was 
a reek of garlic, dried fish, sweat, dust, anise, cloves and turmeric. The crowd 
surged round them, swarms of stocky peasants with cigar-brown faces, 
withered elders with their grey hair tied in a bun behind, young mothers 
carrying naked babies astride the hip. Flo was trodden on and yelped. Low, 
strong shoulders bumped against Elizabeth, as the peasants, too busy 
bargaining even to stare at a white woman, struggled round the stalls. 

‘Look!’ Flory was pointing with his stick to a stall, and saying something, 
but it was drowned by the yells of two women who were shaking their fists at 
each other over a basket of pineapples. Elizabeth had recoiled from the stench 
and din, but he did not notice it, and led her deeper into the crowd, pointing to 
this stall and that. The merchandise was foreign-looking, queer and poor. 
There were vast pomelos hanging on strings like green moons, red bananas, 
baskets of heliotrope-coloured prawns the size of lobsters, brittle dried fish 
tied in bundles, crimson chilis, ducks split open and cured like hams, green 
coco-nuts, the larvae of the rhinoceros beetle, sections of sugar-cane, dahs, 
lacquered sandals, check silk longyis , aphrodisiacs in the form of large, soap- 
like pills, glazed earthenware jars four feet high, Chinese sweetmeats made of 
garlic and sugar, green and white cigars, purple prinjals, persimmon-seed 
necklaces, chickens cheeping in wicker cages, brass Buddhas, heart-shaped 
betel leaves, bottles of Kruschen salts, switches of false hair, red clay cooking- 
pots, steel shoes for bullocks, papierm&che marionettes, strips of alligator hide 
with magical properties. Elizabeth’s head was beginning to swim. At the other 
end of the bazaar the sun gleamed through a priest’s umbrella, blood-red, as 
though through the ear of a giant. In front of a stall four Dravidian women 
were pounding turmeric with heavy stakes in a large wooden mortar. The hot- 
scented yellow powder flew up and tickled Elizabeth’s nostrils, making her 
sneeze. She felt that she could not endure this place a moment longer. She 
touched Flory ’s arm. 

‘This crowd-the heat is so dreadful. Do you think we could get into the 
shade?’ 

He turned round. To tell the truth, he had been too busy talking-mostly 
inaudibly, because of the din-to notice how the heat and stench were affecting 
her. 

‘Oh, I say, I am sorry. Let’s get out of it at once. I tell you what, we’ll go 
along to old Li Yeik’s shop-he’s the Chinese grocer-and he’ll get us a drink of 
something. It is rather stifling here.’ 

‘All these spices-they kind of take your breath away. And what is that 
dreadful smell like fish?’ 

‘Oh, only a kind of sauce they make out of prawns. They bury them and then 



j jo Burmese Days 

dig them up several weeks afterwards.’ 

‘How absolutely horrible!’ 

‘Quite wholesome, I believe. Come away from that!’ he added to Flo, who 
was nosing at a basket of small gudgeon-like fish with spines on their gills. 

Li Yeik’s shop faced the farther end of the bazaar. What Elizabeth had really 
wanted was to go straight back to the Club, but the European look of Li Yeik’s 
shop-front-it was piled with Lancashire-made cotton shirts and almost 
incredibly cheap German clocks-comforted her somewhat after the barbarity 
of the bazaar. They were about to climb the steps when a slim youth of twenty, 
damnably dressed in a longyi, blue cncker blazer and bright yellow shoes, with 
his hair parted and greased Tngaleik fashion’, detached himself from the 
crowd and came after them. He greeted Flory with a small awkward movement 
as though restraining himself from shikoing. 

‘What is it?’ Flory said. 

‘Letter, sir.’ He produced a grubby envelope. 

‘Would you excuse me?’ Flory said to Elizabeth, opening the letter. It was 
from Ma Hla May-or rather, it had been written for her and she had signed it 
with a cross-and it demanded fifty rupees, in a vaguely menacing manner. 

Flory pulled the youth aside. ‘You speak English? Tell Ma Hla May I’ll see 
about this later. And tell her that if she tries blackmailing me she won’t get 
another pice. Do you understand?’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

‘And now go away. Don’t follow me about, or there’ll be trouble.’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

‘A clerk wanting a job,’ Flory explained to Elizabeth as they went up the 
steps. ‘They come bothering one at all hours.’ And he reflected that the tone of 
the letter was curious, for he had not expected Ma Hla May to begin 
blackmailing him so soon; however, he had not time at the moment to wonder 
what it might mean. 

They went into the shop, which seemed dark after the outer air. Li Yeik, 
who was sitting smoking among his baskets of merchandise-there was no 
counter-hobbled eagerly forward when he saw who had come in. Flory was a 
friend of his. He was an old bent-kneed man dressed in blue, wearing a pigtail, 
with a chinless yellow face, all cheekbones, like a benevolent skull. He greeted 
Flory with nasal honking noises which he intended for Burmese, and at once 
hobbled to the back of the shop to call for refreshments. There was a cool 
sweetish smell of opium. Long strips of red paper with black lettering were 
pasted on the walls, and at one side there was a little altar with a portrait of two 
large, serene-looking people in embroidered robes, and two sticks of incense 
smouldering in front of it. Two Chinese women, one old, and a girl were 
sitting on a mat rolling cigarettes with maize straw and tobacco like chopped 
horsehair. They wore black silk trousers, and their feet, with bulging, swollen 
insteps, were crammed into red-heeled wooden slippers no bigger than a 
doll’s. A naked child was crawling slowly about the floor like a large yellow 
frog. 

‘Do look at those women’s feet!’ Elizabeth whispered as soon as Li Yeik’s 



Burmese Days 151 

back was turned. ‘Isn’t it simply dreadful! How do they get them like that? 
Surely it isn’t natural?’ 

‘No, they deform them artificially. It’s going out in China, I believe, but the 
people here are behind the times. Old Li Yeik’s pigtail is another anachronism. 
Those small feet are beautiful according to Chinese ideas.’ 

‘Beautiful! They’re so horrible I can hardly look at them. These people must 
be absolute savages!’ 

‘Oh no! They’re highly civilized; more civilized than we are, in my opinion. 
Beauty’s all a matter of taste. There are a people in this country called the 
Palaungs who admire long necks in women. The girls wear broad brass rings to 
stretch their necks, and they put on more and more of them until in the end 
they have necks like giraffes. It’s no queerer than bustles or crinolines.’ 

At this moment Li Yeik came back with two fat, round-faced Burmese girls, 
evidently sisters, giggling and carrying between them two chairs and a blue 
Chinese teapot holding half a gallon. The two girls were or had been Li Yeik’s 
concubines. The old man had produced a tin of chocolates and was prising off 
the lid and smiling in a fatherly way, exposing three long, tobacco-blackened 
teeth. Elizabeth sat down in a very uncomfortable frame of mind. She was 
perfectly certain that it could not be right to accept these people’s hospitality 
One of the Burmese girls had at once gone behind the chairs and begun fanning 
Flory and Elizabeth, while the other knelt at their feet and poured out cups of 
tea. Elizabeth felt very foolish with the girl fanning the back of her neck and 
the Chinaman grinning in front of her. Flory always seemed to get her into 
these uncomfortable situations. She took a chocolate from the tin Li Yeik 
offered her, but she could not bring herself to say ‘thank you’. 

‘Is this all right ?’ she whispered to Flory. 

‘All right?’ 

‘I mean, ought we to be sitting down in these people’s house? Isn’t it sort 
of- sort of infra dig ?’ 

‘It’s all right with a Chinaman. They’re a favoured race in this country. And 
they’re very democratic in their ideas. It’s best to treat them more or less as 
equals.’ 

‘This tea looks absolutely beastly. It’s quite green. You’d think they’d have 
the sense to put milk in it, wouldn’t you?’ 

‘It’s not bad. It’s a special kind of tea old Li Yeik gets from China. It has 
orange blossoms in it, I believe.’ 

‘Ugh! It tastes exactly like earth,’ she said, having tasted it. 

Li Yeik stood holding his pipe, which was two feet long with a metal bowl 
the size of an acom, and watching the Europeans to see whether they enjoyed 
his tea. The girl behmd the chair said something in Burmese, at which both of 
them burst out giggling again. The one kneeling on the floor looked up and 
gazed in a naive admiring way at Elizabeth. Then she turned to Flory and 
asked him whether the English lady wore stays. She pronounced it s’tays. 

‘Ch!’ said Li Yeik in a scandalized manner, stirring the girl with his toe to 
silence her. 

‘I should hardly care to ask her,’ Flory said. 



i $2 Burmese Days 

‘Oh, thakin, please do ask her! We are so anxious to know! 5 

There was an argument, and the girl behind the chair forgot fanning and 
joined in. Both of them, it appeared, had been pining all their lives to see a 
veritable pair of s’tays. They had heard so many tales about them; they were 
made of steel on the principle of a strait waistcoat, and they compressed a 
woman so tightly that she had no breasts, absolutely no breasts at all! The girls 
pressed their hands against their fat ribs in illustration. Would not Flory be so 
kind as to ask the English lady? There was a room behind the shop where she 
could come with them and undress. They had been so hoping to see a pair of 
s’tays. 

Then the conversation lapsed suddenly. Elizabeth was sitting stiffly, holding 
her tiny cup of tea, which she could not bring herself to taste again, and 
wearing a rather hard smile. A chill fell upon the Orientals; they realized that 
the English girl, who could not join in their conversation, was not at her ease. 
Her elegance and her foreign beauty, which had charmed them a moment 
earlier, began to awe them a little. Even Flory was conscious of the same 
feeling. There came one of those dreadful moments that one has with 
Orientals, when everyone avoids everyone else’s eyes, trying vainly to think of 
something to say. Then the naked child, which had been exploring some 
baskets at the back of the shop, crawled across to where the European sat. It 
examined their shoes and stockings with great curiosity, and then, looking up, 
saw their white faces and was seized with terror. It let out a desolate wail, and 
began making water on the floor. 

The old Chinese woman looked up, clicked her tongue and went on rolling 
cigarettes. No one else took the smallest notice. A pool began to form on the 
floor. Elizabeth was so horrified that she set her cup down hastily, and spilled 
the tea. She plucked at Flory’s arm. 

‘That child! Do look what it’s doing! Really, can’t someone-it’s too awful!’ 

For a moment everyone gazed in astonishment, and then they all grasped 
what was the matter. There was a flurry and a general clicking of tongues. No 
one had paid any attention to the child-the incident was too normal to be 
noticed-and now they all felt horribly ashamed. Everyone began putting the 
blame on the child. There were exclamations of ‘What a disgraceful child! 
What a disgusting child! 5 The old Chinese woman carried the child, still 
howling, to the door, and held it out over the step as though wringing out a 
bath sponge. And in the same moment, as it seemed, Flory and Elizabeth were 
outside the shop, and he was following her back to the road with Li Yeik and 
the others looking after them in dismay. 

‘If that’s what you call civilized people-!’ she was exclaiming. 

‘I’m sorry, 5 he said feebly. ‘I never expected-’ 

‘What absolutely disgusting people! 5 

She was bitterly angry. Her face had flushed a wonderful delicate pink, like a 
poppy bud opened a day too soon. It was the deepest colour of which it was 
capable. He followed her past the bazaar and back to the main road, and they 
had gone fifty yards before he ventured to speak again. 

Tm so sorry that this should have happened! Li Yeik is such a decent old 



Burmese Days 153 

chap. He’d hate to think that he’d offended you. Really it would have been 
better to stay a few minutes. Just to thank him for the tea.’ 

‘Thank him! After that! 3 

‘But honestly, you oughtn’t to mind that sort of thing. Not in this country. 
These people’s whole outlook is so different from ours. One has to adjust 
oneself. Suppose, for instance, you were back in the Middle Ages-’ 

‘I think I’d rather not discuss it any longer.’ 

It was the first time they had definitely quarrelled. He was too miserable 
even to ask himself how it was that he offended her. He did not realize that this 
constant striving to interest her in Oriental things struck her only as perverse, 
ungentlemanly, a deliberate seeking after the squalid and the ‘beastly’. He had 
not grasped even now with what eyes she saw the ‘natives’. He only knew that 
at each attempt to make her share his life, his thoughts, his sense of beauty, she 
shied away from him like a frightened horse. 

They walked up the road, he to the left of her and a little behind. He watched 
her averted cheek and the tiny gold hairs on her nape beneath the brim of her 
Terai hat. How he loved her, how he loved her! It was as though he had never 
truly loved her till this moment, when he walked behind her in disgrace, not 
even daring to show his disfigured face. He made to speak several times, and 
stopped himself. His voice was not quite ready, and he did not know what he 
could say that did not risk offending her somehow. At last he said, flatly, with a 
feeble pretence that nothing was the matter: 

‘It’s getting beastly hot, isn’t it?’ 

With the temperature at 90 degrees in the shade it was not a brilliant remark. 
To his surprise she seized on it with a kind of eagerness. She turned to face 
him, and she was smiling again. 

‘Isn’t it simply bakingV 

With that they were at peace. The silly, banal remark, bringing with it the 
reassuring atmosphere of Club-chatter, had soothed her like a charm. Flo, who 
had lagged behind, came puffing up to them dribbling saliva; in an instant they 
were talking, quite as usual, about dogs. They talked about dogs for the rest of 
the way home, almost without a pause. Dogs are an inexhaustible subject. 
Dogs, dogs! thought Flory as they climbed the hot hillside, with the mounting 
sun scorching their shoulders through their thin clothes, like the breath of 
fire-were they never to talk of anything except dogs? Or failing dogs, 
gramophone records and tennis racquets? And yet, when they kept to trash like 
this, how easily, how amicably they could talk! 

They passed the glittering white wall of the cemetery and came to the 
Lackersteens’ gate. Old mohur trees grew round it, and a clump of hollyhocks 
eight feet high, with round red flowers like blowsy girls’ faces. Flory took off 
his hat in the shade and fanned his face. 

‘Well, we’re back before the worst of the heat comes. I’m afraid our trip to 
the bazaar wasn’t altogether a success.’ 1 

‘Oh, not at all! I enjoyed it, really I did.’ 

‘No-I don’t know, something unfortunate always seems to happen. -Oh, by 
the way! You haven’t forgotten that We’re going out shooting the day after 



j 54 Burmese Days 

tomorrow? I hope that day will be all right for you?’ 

‘Yes, and my uncle’s going to lend me his gun. Such awful fun! You’ll have 
to teach me all about shooting. I am so looking forward to it.’ 

‘So am I. It’s a rotten time of year for shooting, but we’ll do our best. Good- 
bye for the present, then.’ 

‘Good-bye, Mr Flory.’ 

She still called him Mr Flory though he called her Elizabeth. They parted 
and went their ways, each thinking of the shooting trip, which, both of them 
felt, would in some way put things right between them. 


12 


In the sticky, sleepy heat of the living-room, almost dark because of the beaded 
curtain, U Po Kyin was marching slowly up and down, boasting. From time to 
time he would put a hand under his singlet and scratch his sweating breasts, 
huge as a woman’s with fat. Ma Kin was sitting on her mat, smoking slender 
white cigars. Through the open door of the bedroom one could see the corner 
of U Po Kyin’s huge square bed, with carved teak posts, like a catafalque, on 
which he had committed many and many a rape. 

Ma Kin was now hearing for the first time of the ‘other affair’ which 
underlay U Po Kyin’s attack on Dr Veraswami. Much as he despised her 
intelligence, U Po Kyin usually let Ma Kin into his secrets sooner or later. She 
was the only person in his immediate circle who was not afraid of him, and 
there was therefore a pleasure in impressing her. 

‘Well, Kin Kin,’ he said, ‘you see how it has all gone according to plan! 
Eighteen anonymous letters already, and every one of them a masterpiece. I 
would repeat some of them to you if I thought you were capable of 
appreciating them.’ 

‘But supposing the Europeans take no notieeftof your anonymous letters? 
.What then?’ 

‘Take no notice? Aha, no fear of that! I think I know something about the 
European mentality. .Let me tell you. Kin Kin, that if there is one thing I can 
do, it is to write an anonymous letter.’ 

This was true. U Po Kyin’s letters had already taken effect, and especially on 
their chief target, Mr Macgregor. 

Only two days earlier than this, Mr Macgregor had spent a very troubled 
evening in trying to make up his mind whether Dr Veraswami was or was not 
guilty of disloyalty to the Government. Of course, it was not a question of any 
overt act of disloyalty-that was quite irrelevant. The point was, was the doctor 
the kind of. man who would hold seditious opinions? In India you are not 
judged for what you do, but for what you are. The merest breath of suspicion 



Burmese Days 155 

against his loyalty can ruin an Oriental official. Mr Macgregor had too just a 
nature to condemn even an Oriental out of hand. He had puzzled as late as 
midnight over a whole pile of confidential papers, including the five 
anonymous letters he had received, besides two others that had been 
forwarded to him by Westfield, pinned together with a cactus thorn. 

It was not only the letters. Rumours about the doctor had been pouring in 
from every side. U Po Kyin fully grasped that to call the doctor a traitor was 
not enough in itself; it was necessary to attack his reputation from every 
possible angle. The doctor was charged not only with sedition, but also with 
extortion, rape, torture, performing illegal operations, performing operations 
while blind drunk, murder by poison, murder by sympathetic magic, eating 
beef, selling death certificates to murderers, wearing his shoes in the precincts 
of the pagoda and making homosexual attempts on the Military Police 
drummer boy. To hear what was said of him, anyone would have imagined the 
doctor a compound of Machiavelli, Sweeny Todd and the Marquis de Sade. 
Mr Macgregor had not paid much attention at first. He was too accustomed to 
this kind of thing. But with the last of the anonymous letters U Po Kyin had 
brought off a stroke that was brilliant even for him. 

It concerned the escape of Nga Shwe O, the dacoit, from Kyauktada jail. 
Nga Shwe O, who was in the middle of a well-earned seven years, had been 
preparing his escape for several months past, and as a start his friends outside 
had bribed one of the Indian warders. The warder received his hundred rupees 
in advance, applied for leave to visit the death-bed of a relative and spent 
several busy days in the Mandalay brothels. Time passed, and the day of the 
escape was postponed several times-the warder, meanwhile, growing more 
and more homesick for the brothels. Finally he decided to earn a further 
reward by betraying the plot to U Po Kyin. But U Po Kyin, as usual, saw his 
chance. He told the warder on dire penalties to hold his tongue, and then, on 
the very night of the escape, when it was too late to do anything, sent another 
anonymous letter to Mr Macgregor, warning him that an escape was being 
attempted. The letter added, needless to say, that Dr Veraswami, the 
superintendent of the jail, had been bribed for his connivance. 

In the morning there was a hullabaloo and a rushing to and fro of warders 
and policemen at the jail, for Nga Shwe O had escaped. (He was a long way 
down the river, in a sampan provided by U Po Kyin.) This time Mr Macgregor 
was taken aback. Whoever had written the letter must have been privy to the 
plot, and was probably telling the truth about the doctor’s connivance. It was a 
very serious matter. A jail superintendent who will take bribes to let a prisoner 
escape is capable of anything. And therefore-perhaps the logical sequence was 
not quite clear, but it was clear enough to Mr Macgregor-therefore the charge 
of sedition, which was the main charge against the doctor, became much more 
credible. 

U Po Kyin had attacked the other Europeans at the same time. Floty, who 
was the doctor’s friend and his chief source of prestige, had been scared easily 
enough into deserting him. With Westfield it was a little harder. Westfield, as a 
policeman, knew a great deal about U Po Kyin and might conceivably upset his 



j j<5 Burmese Days 

plans. Policemen and magistrates are natural enemies. But U Po Kyin had 
known how to turn even this fact to advantage. He had accused the doctor, 
anonymously of course, of being in league with the notorious scoundrel and 
bribe-taker U Po Kyin. That settled Westfield. As for Ellis, no anonymous 
letters were needed in his case; nothing could possibly make him think worse 
of the doctor than he did already. 

U Po Kyin had even sent one of his anonymous letters to Mrs Lackersteen, 
for he knew the power of European women. Dr Veraswami, the letter said, was 
inciting the natives to abduct and rape the European women-no details were 
given, nor were they needed. U Po Kyin had touched Mrs Lackersteen’s weak 
spot. To her mind the words ‘sedition’, ‘Nationalism,’, ‘rebellion’, ‘Home 
Rule’, conveyed one thing and one only, and that was a picture of herself being 
raped by a procession of jet-black coolies with rolling white eyeballs. It was a 
thought that kept her awake at night sometimes. Whatever good regard the 
Europeans might once have had for the doctor was crumbling rapidly. 

‘So you see,’ said U Po Kyin with a pleased air, ‘you see how I have 
undermined him. He is like a tree sawn through at the base. One tap and down 
he comes. In three weeks or less I shall deliver that tap.’ 

‘How?’ 

‘I am just coming to that. I think it is time for you to hear about it. You have 
no sense in these matters, but you know how to hold your tongue You have 
heard talk of this rebellion that is brewing near Thongwa village?’ 

‘Yes. They are very foolish, those villagers. What can they do with their dahs 
and spears against the Indian soldiers? They will be shot down like wild 
animals.’ 

‘Of course. If there is any fighting it will be a massacre. But they are only a 
pack of superstitious peasants. They have put their faith in these absurd 
bullet-proof jackets that are being distributed to them. I despise such 
ignorance.’ 

‘Poor men! Why do you not stop them, Ko Po Kyin? There is no need to 
arrest anybody. You have only to go to the village and tell them that you know 
their plans, and they will never dare to go on.’ 

‘AhfWell, I could stop them if I chose, of course. But then I do not choose. I 
have my reasons. You see. Kin Kin-you will please keep silent about this-this 
is, so to speak, my own rebellion. I arranged it myself.’ 

‘What!’ 

Ma Kin dropped her cigar. Her eyes had opened so wide that the pale blue 
white showed all round the pupil. She was horrified. She burst out: 

‘Ko Po Kyin, what are you saying? You do not mean it! You, raising a 
rebellion-it cannot be true!’ 

‘Certainly it is true. And a very good job we are making of it. That magician 
whom I brought from Rangoon is a clever fellow. He has toured all over India 
as a circus conjurer. The bullet-proof jackets were bought at Whiteaway & 
L&idlaw’s stores, one rupee eight annas each. They are costing me a pretty 
penny, I can tell you.’ 

‘But, Ko Po Kyin! A rebellion! The terrible fighting and shooting, and all 



Burmese Days 157 

the poor men who will be killed! Surely you have not gone mad? Are you not 
afraid of being shot yourself?’ 

U Po Kyin halted in his stride. He was astonished. ‘Good gracious, woman, 
what idea have you got hold of now? You do not suppose that I am rebelling 
against the Government? I— a Government servant of thirty years’ standing! 
Good heavens, no! I said that I had started the rebellion, not that I was taking 
part in it. It is these fools of villagers who are going to risk their skins, not I. No 
one dreams that I have anything to do with it, or ever will, except Ba Sein and 
one or two others.’ 

‘But you said it was you who were persuading them to rebel?’ 

‘Of course. I have accused Veraswami of raising a rebellion against the 
Government. Well, I must have a rebellion to show, must I not?’ 

‘Ah, I see. And when the rebellion breaks out, you are going to say that Dr 
Veraswami is to blame for it. Is that it?’ 

‘How slow you are! I should have thought even a fool would have seen that I 
am raising the rebellion merely in order to crush it. I am-what is that 
expression Mr Macgregor uses? Agent provocatmr-lu&x.m? you would not 
understand. I am agent provocateur . First I persuade these fools at Thongwato 
rebel, and then I arrest them as rebels. At the very moment when it is due to 
start, I shall pounce on the ringleaders and clap every one of them in jail After 
that, I dare say there may possibly be some fighting. A few men may be killed 
and a few more sent to the Andamans. But, meanwhile, I shall be first in the 
field. U Po Kyin, the man who quelled a most dangerous rising in the nick of 
time! I shall be the hero of the district.’ 

U Po Kyin, justly proud of his plan, began to pace up and down the room 
again with his hands behind his back, smiling. Ma Kin considered the plan in 
silence for some time. Finally she said: 

‘I still do not see why you are doing this, Ko Po Kyin. Where is it all leading? 
And what has it got to do with Dr Veraswami?’ 

‘I shall never teach you wisdom, Kin Kin! Did I not tell you at the beginning 
that Veraswami stands in my way? This rebellion is the very thing to get rid of 
him. Of course we shall never prove that he is responsible for it; but what does 
that matter? All the Europeans will take it for granted that he is mixed up in it 
somehow. That is how their minds work. He will be ruined for life. And his fall 
is my rise. The blacker I can paint him, the more glorious my own conduct will 
appear. Now do you understand?’ 

‘Yes, I do understand. And I think it is a base, evil plan. I wonder you are 
not ashamed to tell it me.’ 

‘Now, Kin Kin! Surely you are not going to start that nonsense over again?’ 
‘Ko Po Kyin, why is it that you are only happy when you are being wicked? 
Why is it that everything you do must bring evil to others? Think of that poor 
doctor who will be dismissed from his post, and those villagers who will be 
shot or flogged with bamboos or imprisoned for life. Is it necessary to do such 
things? What can you want with more money when you are rich already?’ 
‘Money! Who is talking about money? Some day, woman, you will realize 
that there are other things in the world besides money. Fame, for example. 



j $8 Burmese Days 

Greatness. Do you realize that the Governor of Burma will very probably pin 
an Order on my breast for my loyal action in this affair? Would not even you be 
proud of such an honour as that?’ 

Ma Kin shook her head, unimpressed. ‘When will you remember, Ko Po 
Kyin, that you are not going to live a thousand years? Consider what happens 
to those who have lived wickedly. There is such a thing, for instance, as being 
turned into a rat or a frog There is even hell. I remember what a priest said to 
me once about hell, something that he had translated from the Pali scriptures, 
and it was very terrible. He said, “Once in a thousand centuries two red-hot 
spears will meet m your heart, and you will say to yourself, ‘Another thousand 
centuries of my torment are ended, and there is as much to come as there has 
been before.’” Is it not very dreadful to think of such things, Ko Po Kyin?’ 

U Po Kyin laughed and gave a careless wave of his hand that meant 
‘pagodas’. 

‘Well, I hope you may still laugh when it comes to the end. But for myself, I 
should not care to look back upon such a life.’ 

She relighted her cigar with her thin shoulder turned disapprovingly on U 
Po Kyin while he took several more turns up and down the room. When he 
spoke, it was more seriously than before, and even with a touch of diffidence. 

‘You know. Kin Kin, there is another matter behind all this. Something that 
I have not told to you or to anyone else. Even Ba Sein does not know. But I 
believe I will tell it you now.’ 

‘I do not want to hear it, if it is more wickedness.’ 

‘No, no. You were asking just now what is my real object in this affair. You 
think, I suppose, that I am ruining Veraswami merely because I dislike him 
and his ideas about bribes as a nuisance. It is not only that. There is something 
else that is far more important, and it concerns you as well as me.’ 

‘What is it?’ 

‘Have you never felt in you. Kin Kin, a desire for higher things? Has it never 
struck you that after all our successes-all my successes, I should say— we are 
almost in the same position as when we started? I am worth, I dare say, two 
lakhs of rupees, and yet look at the style in which we live! Look at this room! 
Positively it is no better than that of a peasant. I am tired of eating with my 
fingers and associating only with Burmans-poor, inferior people-and living, 
as you might say, like a miserable Township Officer. Money is not enough; I 
should like to feel that I have risen in the world as well. Do you not wish 
sometimes for a way of life that is a little more— how shall I say— elevated?’ 

‘I do not know how we could want more than what we have already. When I 
was a girl in my village I never thought that I should live in such a house as 
this. Look at those English chairs-I have never sat in one of them in my life. 
But I am very proud to look at them and think that I own them.’ 

‘Ch! Why didi you ever leave that village of yours. Kin Kin? You are only fit 
to stand gossiping by the well with a stone water-pot on your head. But I am 
more ambitious , God be praised. And now I will tell you the real reason why I 
asm. intriguing against Veraswami. It is in my mind to do something that is 
really magmficent. Something noble, glorious! Something that is the very 



Burmese Days 159 

highest honour an Oriental can attain to. You know what I mean, of course?’ 

‘No. What do you mean?’ 

‘Come, now! The greatest achievement of my life! Surely you can guess?’ 

‘Ah, I know! You are going to buy a motor-car. But oh, Ko Po Kyin, please 
do not expect me to ride in it!’ 

U Po Kyin threw up his hands in disgust. ‘A motor-car! You have the mind 
of a bazaar peanut-seller! I could buy twenty motor-cars if I wanted them. And 
what use would a motor-car be in this place? No, it is something far grander 
than that.’ 

‘What, then?’ 

‘It is this. I happen to know that in a month’s time the Europeans are going 
to elect one native member to their Club. They do not want to do it, but they 
will have orders from the Commissioner, and they will obey. Naturally, they 
would elect Veraswami, who is the highest native official in the district. But I 
have disgraced Veraswami. And so-’ 

‘What?’ 

U Po Kyin did not answer for a moment. He looked at Ma Kin, and his vast 
yellow face, with its broad jaw and numberless teeth, was so softened that it 
was almost child-like. There might even have been tears in his tawny eyes. He 
said in a small, almost awed voice, as though the greatness of what he was 
saying overcame him: 

‘Do you not see, woman? Do you not see that if Veraswami is disgraced I 
shall be elected to the Club myself?’ 

The effect of it was crushing. There was not another word of argument on 
Ma Kin’s part. The magnificence of U Po Kyin’s project had struck her dumb. 

And not withour reason, for all the achievements of U Po Kyin’s life were as' 
nothing beside this. It is a real triumph-it would be doubly so in 
Kyauktada-for an official of the lower ranks to worm his way into the 
European Club. The European Club, that remote, mysterious temple, that 
holy of holies far harder of entry than Nirvana! Po Kyin, the naked gutter-boy 
of Mandalay, the thieving clerk and obscure official, would enter that sacred 
place, call Europeans ‘old chap’, drink whisky and soda and knock white balls 
to and fro on the green table! Ma Kin, the village woman, who had first seen 
the light through the chinks of a bamboo hut thatched with palm-leaves, would 
sit on a high chair with her feet imprisoned in silk stockings and high-heeled 
shoes (yes, she would actually wear shoes in that place!) talking to English 
ladies in Hindustani, about baby-linen! It was a prospect that would have 
dazzled anybody. 

For a long time Ma Kin remained silent, her lips parted, thinking of the 
European Club and the splendours that it mighr contain. For the first time in 
her life she surveyed U Po Kyin’s intrigues without disapproval. Perhaps it 
was a feat greater even than the storming of the Club to have planted a grain of 
ambition in Ma Kin’s gentle heart. 



13 


As Flory came through the gate of the hospital compound four ragged 
sweepers passed him, carrying some dead coolie, wrapped in sackcloth, to a 
foot-deep grave in the jungle. Flory crossed the brick-like earth of the yard 
between the hospital sheds. All down the wide verandas, on sheetless 
charpoys, rows of grey-faced men lay silent and moveless. Some filthy-looking 
curs, which were said to devour amputated limbs, dozed or snapped at their 
fleas among the piles of the buildings. The whole place wore a sluttish and 
decaying air Dr Veras wami struggled hard to keep it clean, but there was no 
coping with the dust and the bad water-supply, and the inertia of sweepers and 
half-trained Assistant Surgeons. 

Flory was told that the doctor was in the out-patients’ department. It was a 
plaster-walled room furnished only with a table and two chairs, and a dusty 
portrait of Queen Victoria, much awry. A procession of Burmans, peasants 
with gnarled muscles beneath their faded rags, were filing into the room and 
queueing up at the table The doctor was in shirt-sleeves and sweating 
profusely. He sprang to his feet with an exclamation of pleasure, and in his 
usual fussy haste thrust Flory into the vacant chair and produced a tin of 
cigarettes from the drawer of the table. 

‘What a delightful visit, Mr Flory! Please to make yourself comfortable-that 
iss, if one can possibly be comfortable in such a place ass this, ha, ha! 
Afterwards, at my house, we will talk with beer and amenities. Kindly excuse 
me while I attend to the populace.’ 

Flory sat down, and the hot sweat immediately burst out and drenched his 
shirt. The heat of the room was stifling. The peasants steamed garlic from all 
their pores. As each man came to the table the doctor would bounce from his 
chair, prod the patient in the back, lay a black ear to his chest, fire off several 
questions in villainous Burmese, then bounce back to the table and scribble a 
prescription. The patients took the prescriptions across the yard to the 
Compounder, who gave them bottles filled with water and various vegetable 
dyes. The Compounder supported himself largely by the sale of drugs, for the 
Government paid, him only twenty-five rupees a month. However, the doctor 
knew nothing of this. 

On most mornings the doctor had not time to attend to the out-patients 
himself, and left them to one of the Assistant Surgeons. The Assistant 
Surgeon’s methods of diagnosis were brief. He would simply ask each patient, 
'Where is your pain? Head, back or belly?’ and at the reply hand out a 



Burmese Days 161 

prescription from one of three piles that he had prepared beforehand. The 
patients much preferred this method to the doctor’s. The doctor had a way of 
asking them whether they had suffered from venereal diseases -an 
ungentlemanly, pointless question-and sometimes he horrified them still 
more by suggesting operations. ‘Belly-cutting’ was their phrase for it. The 
majority of them would have died a dozen times over rather than submit to 
‘belly-cutting’. 

As the last patient disappeared the doctor sank into his chair, fanning his 
face with the prescription-pad. 

‘Ach, this heat! Some mornings I think that never will I get the smell of 
garlic out of my nose! It iss amazing to me how their very blood becomes 
impregnated with it. Are you not suffocated, Mr Flory? You English have the 
sense of smell almost too highly developed. What torments you must all suffer 
in our filthy East!’ 

‘Abandon your noses, all ye who enter here, what? They might write that up 
over the Suez Canal. You seem busy this morning?’ 

‘Ass ever. Ah but, my friend, how discouraging iss the work of a doctor in 
this country! These villagers-dirty, ignorant savages! Even to get them to 
come to hospital iss all we can do, and they will die of gangrene or carry a 
tumour ass large ass a melon for ten years rather than face the knife. And such 
medicines ass their own so-called doctors give to them! Herbs gathered under 
the new moon, tigers’ whiskers, rhinoceros horn, urine, menstrual blood! How 
men can drink such compounds iss disgusting.’ 

‘Rather picturesque, all the same. You ought to compile a Burmese 
pharmacopoeia, doctor. It would be almost as good as Culpeper.’ 

‘Barbarous cattle, barbarous cattle,’ said the doctor, beginning to struggle 
into his white coat. ‘Shall we go back to my house? There iss beer and I trust a 
few fragments of ice left. I have an operation at ten, strangulated hernia, very 
urgent. Till then I am free.’ 

‘Yes. As a matter of fact there’s something I rather wanted to talk to you 
about.’ 

They recrossed the yard and climbed the steps of the doctor’s veranda. The 
doctor, having felt in the ice-chest and found that the ice was all melted to 
tepid water, opened a bottle of beer and called fussily to the servants to set 
some more bottles swinging in a cradle of wet straw. Flory was standing 
looking over the veranda rail, with his hat still on. The fact was that he had 
come here to utter an apology. He had been avoiding the doctor for nearly a 
fortnight- since the day, in fact, when he had set his name to the insulting 
notice at the Club. But the apology had got to be uttered. U Po Kyin was a very 
good judge of men, but he had erred in supposing that two anonymous letters 
were enough to scare Flory permanently away from his friend. 

‘Look here, doctor, you know what I wanted to say?’ 

‘I? No.’ 

‘Yes, you do. It’s about that beastly trick I played on you the other week. 
When Ellis put that notice on the Club board and I signed my name to it. You 
must have heard about it. I want to try and explain-’ 



j 1 6 2 Burmese Days 

‘No, no, my friend, no, no!’ The doctor was so distressed that he sprang 
across the veranda and seized Flory by the arm. ‘You shall not explain! Please 
never mention it! I understand perfectly-but most perfectly.’ 

‘No, you don’t understand. You couldn’t. You don’t realize just what kind of 
pressure is put on one to make one do things like that. There was nothing to 
make me sign the notice. Nothing could have happened if I’d refused. There’s 
no law telling us to be beastly to Orientals -quite the contrary. But-it’s just 
that one daren’t be loyal to an Oriental when it means going against the others. 
It doesn’t do. If I’d stuck out against signing the notice I’d have been in 
disgrace at the Club for a week or two. So I funked it, as usual.’ 

‘Please, Mr Flory, please! Possitively you will make me uncomfortable if 
you continue. Ass though I could not make all allowances for your position!’ 
‘Our motto, you know is, “In India, do as the English do”.’ 

‘Of course, of course. And a most noble motto. “Hanging together”, ass you 
call it. It iss the secret of your superiority to we Orientals.’ 

‘Well, it’s never much use saying one’s sorry. But what I did come here to 
say was that it shan’t happen again. In fact-’ 

‘Now, now, Mr Flory, you will oblige me by saying no more upon this 
subject. It iss all over and forgotten. Please to drink up your beer before it 
becomes ass hot ass tea. Also, I have a thing to tell you. You have not asked for 
my news yet/ 

‘Ah, your news. What is your news, by the way? How’s everything been 
going all this time? How’s Ma Britannia? Still moribund?’ 

‘Aha, very low, very low! But not so low ass I. I am in deep waters, my 
friend.’ 

‘What? U Po Kyin again? Is he still libelling you?’ 

‘If he iss libelling me! This time it iss-well, it iss something diabolical. My 
friend, you have heard of this rebellion that is supposed to be on the point of 
breaking out in the district?’ 

‘I’ve heard a lot of talk. Westfield’s been out bent on slaughter, but I hear he 
can’t find any rebels. Only the usual village Hampdens who won’t pay their 
taxes.’ 

‘Ah yes. Wretched fools! Do you know how much iss the tax that most of 
them have refused to pay? Five rupees! They will get tired of it and pay up 
presently. We have this trouble every year. But ass for the rebellion-the so- 
called rebellion, Mr Flory-I wish you to know that there iss more in it than 
meets the eye.’ 

‘Oh? What?’ 

To Flory’s surprise the doctor made such a violent gesture of anger that he 
spilled most of his beer. He put his glass down on the veranda rail and burst 
out: 

‘It iss U Po Kyin again! That unutterable scoundrel! That crocodile 
deprived of natural feeling! That-that-’ 

‘Go on. “That obscene trunk of humors, that swol’n parcel of dropsies, that 
bolting-hutch of beastlines$”-go on. What’s he been up to now?’ 

'* ‘A villainy unparalleled’-and here the doctor outlined the plot for a sham 



Burmese Days 16 3 

rebellion, very much as U Po Kyin had explained it to Ma Kin. The only detail 
not known to him was U Po Kyin’s intention of getting himself elected to the 
European Club. The doctor’s face could not accurately be said to flush, but it 
grew several shades blacker in his anger. Flory was so astonished that he 
remained standing up. 

‘The cunning old devil! Who’d have thought he had it in him? But how did 
you manage to find all this out?’ 

‘Ah, I have a few friends left. But now do you see, my friend, what ruin he iss 
preparing for me? Already he hass calumniated me right and left. When this 
absurd rebellion breaks out, he will do everything in his power to connect my 
name with it. And I tell you that the slightest suspicion of my loyalty could be 
ruin for me, ruin! If it were ever breathed that I were even a sympathizer with 
this rebellion, there iss an end of me.’ 

‘But, damn it, this is ridiculous f Surely you can defend yourself somehow ? 5 

‘How can I defend myself when I can prove nothing? I know that all this iss 
true, but what use iss that? If I demand a public inquiry, for every witness I 
produce U Po Kyin would produce fifty. You do not realize the influence of 
that man in the district. No one dare speak against him.’ 

‘But why need you prove anything? Why not go to old Macgregor and tell 
him about it? He’s a very fair-minded old chap in his way. He’d hear you 
out.’ 

‘Useless, useless. You have not the mind of an intriguer, Mr Flory. Qui 
s’excuse, s’accuse, iss it not? It does not pay to cry that there iss a conspiracy 
against one.’ 

‘Well, what are you going to do, then?’ 

‘There iss nothing I can do. Simply I must wait and hope that my prestige 
will carry me through. In affairs like this, where a native official’s reputation iss 
at stake, there iss no question of proof, of evidence. All depends upon one’s 
standing with the Europeans. If my standing iss good, they will not believe it 
of me; if bad, they will believe it. Prestige iss all.’ 

They were silent for a moment. Flory understood well enough that ‘prestige 
iss all’. He was used to these nebulous conflicts, in which suspicion counts for 
more than proof, and reputation for more than a thousand witnesses. A 
thought came into his head, an uncomfortable, chilling thought which would 
never have occurred to him three weeks earlier. It was one of those moments 
when one sees quite clearly what is one’s duty, and, with all the will in the 
world to shirk it, feels certain that one must carry it out. He said: 

‘Suppose, for instance, you were elected to the Club? Would that do your 
prestige any good?’ 

‘If I were elected to the Club! Ah, indeed, yes! The Club! It iss a fortress 
impregnable. Once there, and no one would listen to these tales about me any 
more than if it were about you, or Mr Macgregor, or any other European 
gentleman. But what hope have I that they will elect me after their minds have 
been poisoned against me?’ 

‘Well now, look here, doctor, I tell you what. I’ll propose your name at the 
next general meeting. I know the question’s got to come up then, and if 



164 Burmese Days 

someone comes forward with the name of a candidate, I dare say no one except 
Ellis will blackball him. And in the meantime-’ 

‘Ah, my friend, my dear friend!’ The doctor’s emotion caused him almost to 
choke. He seized Flory by the hand. ‘Ah, my friend, that iss noble! Truly it iss 
noble! But it iss too much. I fear that you will be m trouble with your European 
friends again Mr Ellis, for example-would he tolerate it that you propose my 
name?’ 

‘Oh, bother Ellis. But you must understand that I can’t promise to get you 
elected. It depends on what Macgregor says and what mood the others are in. 
It may all come to nothing.’ 

The doctor was still holding Flory’ s hand between his own, which were 
plump and damp. The tears had actually started into his eyes, and these, 
magnified by his spectacles, beamed upon Flory like the liquid eyes of a dog. 

‘Ah, my friend! If I should but be elected! What an end to all my troubles! 
But, my friend, ass I said before, do not be too rash in this matter. Beware of U 
Po Kyin! By now he will have numbered you among hiss enemies. And even 
for you hiss enmity can be a danger.’ 

‘Oh, good Lord, he can’t touch me. He’s done nothing so far-only a few silly 
anonymous letters.’ 

‘I would not be too sure. He hass subtle ways to strike. And for sure he will 
raise heaven and earth to keep me from being elected to the Club. If you have a 
weak spot, guard it, my friend. He will find it out. He strikes always at the 
weakest spot.’ 

‘Like the crocodile,’ Flory suggested. 

‘Like the crocodile,’ agreed the doctor gravely. ‘Ah but, my friend, how 
gratifying to me if I should become a member of your European Club! What an 
honour, to be the associate of European gentlemen! But there iss one other 
matter, Mr Flory, that I did not care to mention before. It iss - 1 hope this iss 
clearly understood-that I have no intention of using the Club in any way. 
Membership is all I desire. Even if I were elected, I should not, of course, ever 
presume to come to the Club.’ 

‘Not come to the Club?’ 

‘No, no! Heaven forbid that I should force my society upon the European 
gentlemen! Simply I should pay my subscriptions. That, for me, iss a privilege 
high enough. You understand that, I trust?’ 

‘Perfectly, doctor, perfectly.’ 

Flory could not help laughing as he walked up the hill. He was definitely 
committed now to proposing the doctor’s election. And there would be such a 
row when the others heard of it— oh, such a devil of a row! But the astonishing 
thing was that it only made him laugh. The prospect that would have appalled 
him a month back now almost exhilarated him. 

Why? And why had he given his promise at all? It was a small thing, a small 
risk to take-nothing heroic about it-and yet it was unlike him. Why, after all 
these years-the circumspect, pukka sahib-like years-break all the rules so 
suddenly? 

He knew why. It was because Elizabeth, by coming into his life, had so 



Burmese Days 16$ 

changed it and renewed it that all the dirty, miserable years might never have 
passed. Her presence had changed the whole orbit of his mind. She had 
brought back to him the air of England-dear England, where thought is free 
and one is not condemned forever to dance the danse du pukka sahib for the 
edification of the lower races. Where is the life that late I led? he thought. Just 
by existing she had made it possible for him, she had even made it natural to 
him, to act decently. 

Where is the life that late I led? he thought again as he came through the 
garden gate. He was happy, happy. For he had perceived that the pious ones 
are right when they say that there is salvation and life can begin anew. He came 
up the path, and it seemed to him that his house, his flowers, his servants, all 
the life that so short a time ago had been drenched in ennui and homesickness, 
were somehow made new, significant, beautiful inexhaustibly. What fun it 
could all be, if only you had someone to share it with you! How you could love 
this country, if only you were not alone! Nero was out on the path, braving the 
sun for some grains of paddy that the mail had dropped, taking food to his 
goats. Flo made a dash at him, panting, and Nero sprang into the air with a 
flurry and lighted on Florv’s shoulder. Flory walked into the house with the 
little red cock in his arms, stroking his silky ruff and the smooth, diamond- 
shaped feathers of his back. 

He had not set foot on the veranda before he knew that Ma Hla May was in 
the house. It did not need Ko S’la to come hurrying from within with a face of 
evil tidings. Flory had smelled her scent of sandalwood, garlic, coco-nut oil 
and the jasmine in her hair. He dropped Nero over the veranda rail. 

‘ The woman has come back, 5 said Ko S’la. 

Flory had turned very pale. When he turned pale the birthmark made him 
hideously ugly. A pang like a blade of ice had gone through his entrails. Ma 
Hla May had appeared in the doorway of the bedroom. She stood with her face 
downcast, looking at him from beneath lowered brows. 

‘ Thakin / she said in a low voice, half sullen, half urgent. 

‘Go away!’ said Flory angrily to Ko S’la, venting his fear and anger upon 
him. 

c Thakin / she said, ‘come into the bedroom here. I have a thing to say to you.’ 

He followed her into the bedroom. In a week-it was only a week-her 
appearance had degenerated extraordinarily. Her hair looked greasy. All her 
lockets were gone, and she was wearing a Manchester longyi of flowered 
cotton, costing two rupees eight annas. She had coated her face so thick with 
powder that it was like a clown’s mask, and at the roots of her hair, where the 
powder ended, there was a ribbon of natural-coloured brown skin. She looked 
a drab. Flory would not face her, but stood looking sullenly through the open 
doorway to the veranda. 

‘What do you mean by coming back like this? Why did you not go home to 
your village?’ 

‘I am staying in Kyauktada, at my cousin’s house. How can I go back to my 
village after what has happened?’ 

‘And what do you mean by sending men to demand money from me? How 



166 Burmese Days 

can you want more money already, when I gave you a hundred rupees only a 
week ago?’ 

‘How can I go back?’ she repeated, ignoring what he had said. Her voice rose 
so sharply that he turned round She was standing very upright, sullen, with 
her black brows drawn together and her lips pouted. 

‘Why cannot you go back?’ 

‘After that! After what you have done to me!’ 

Suddenly she burst into a furious tirade. Her voice had risen to the 
hysterical graceless scream of the bazaar women when they quarrel. 

‘How can I go back, to be jeered at and pointed at by those low, stupid 
peasants whom I despise? I who have been a bo-kadaw, a white man’s wife, to 
go home to my father’s house, and shake the paddy basket with old hags and 
women who are too ugly to find husbands 5 Ah, what shame, what shame! Two 
years I was your wife, you loved me and cared for me, and then without 
warning, without reason, you drove me from your door like a dog. And I must 
go back to my village, with no money, with all my jewels and silk longyis gone, 
and the people will point and say, “There is Ma Hla May who thought herself 
cleverer than the rest of us. And behold! her white man has treated her as they 
always do.” I am ruined, ruined! What man will marry me after I have lived 
two years in your house? You have taken my youth from me. Ah, what shame, 
what shame!’ 

He could not look at her; he stood helpless, pale, hang-dog. Every word she 
said was justified, and how tell her that he could do no other than he had done? 
How tell her that it would have been an outrage, a sin, to continue as her lover? 
He almost cringed from her, and the birthmark stood on his yellow face like a 
splash of ink. He said flatly, turning instinctively to money-for money had 
never failed with Ma Hla May: 

‘I will give you money. You shall have the fifty rupees you asked me 
for -more later. I have no more till next month.’ 

This was true. The hundred rupees he had given her, and what he had spent 
on clothes, had taken most of his ready money. To his dismay she burst into a 
loud wail. Her white mask puckered up and the tears sprang quickly out and 
coursed down her cheeks. Before he could stop her she had fallen on her knees 
in front of him, and she was bowing, touching the floor with her forehead in the 
‘full’ shiko of utter abasement, 

‘Get up, get up!’ he exclaimed. The shameful, abject shiko, neck bent, body 
doubled up as though inviting a blow, always horrified him. ‘I can’t bear that. 
Get up this instant.’ 

She wailed again, and made an attempt to clasp his ankles. He stepped 
backwards hurriedly. 

‘Get up, now, and stop that dreadful noise, I don’t know what you are crying 
about.’ 

She did not get up, but only rose to her knees and wailed at him anew. ‘Why 
do you offer me money? Do you think it is only for money that I have come 
back? Do you think that when you have driven me from your door like a dog it 
is only because of money that I care?’ 



Burmese Days 167 

‘Get up, 5 he repeated. He had moved several paces away, lest she should 
seize him. ‘What do you want if it is not money? 5 

‘Why do you hate me? 5 she wailed. ‘What harm have I done you? I stole your 
cigarette-case, but you were not angry at that. You are going to marry this 
white woman, I know it, everyone knows it. But what does it matter, why must 
you turn me away? Why do you hate me?’ 

‘I don’t hate you. I can’t explain. Get up, please get up.’ 

She was weeping quite shamelessly now. After all, she was hardly more than 
a child. She looked at him through her tears, anxiously, studying him for a sign 
of mercy. Then, a dreadful thing, she stretched herself at full length, flat on her 
face. 

‘Get up, get up!’ he cried out in English. ‘I can’t bear that-it’s too 
abominable! 5 

She did not get up, but crept, wormlike, right across the floor to his feet. Her 
body made a broad ribbon on the dusty floor. She lay prostrate in front of him, 
face hidden, arms extended, as though before a god’s altar. 

‘Master, master, 5 she whimpered, ‘will you not forgive me? This once, only 
this once! Take Ma Hla May back. I will be your slave, lower than your slave. 
Anything sooner than turn me away.’ 

She had wound her arms round his ankles, actually was kissing his toes. He 
stood looking down at her with his hands in his pockets, helpless. Flo came 
ambling into the room, walked to where Ma Hla May lay and sniffed at her 
longyi. She wagged her tail vaguely, recognizing the smell. Flory could not 
endure it. He bent down and took Ma Hla May by the shoulders, lifting her to 
her knees. 

‘Stand up, now, 5 he said. ‘It hurts me to see you like this. I will do what I can 
for you. What is the use of crying? 5 

Instantly she cried out in renewed hope: ‘Then you will take me back? Oh, 
master, take Ma Hla May back! No one need ever know. I will stay here when 
that white woman comes, she will think I am one of the servants’ wives. Will 
you not take me back?’ 

‘I cannot. It’s impossible,’ he said, turning away again. 

She heard finality in his tone, and uttered a harsh, ugly cry. She bent 
forward again in a shiko, beating her forehead against the floor. It was 
dreadful. And what was more dreadful than all, what hurt in his breast, was the 
utter gracelessness, the lowness of the emotion beneath those entreaties. For in 
all this there was not a spark of love for him. If she wept and grovelled it was 
only for the position she had once had as his mistress, the idle life, the rich 
clothes and dominion over servants. There was something pitiful beyond 
words in that. Had she loved him he could have driven her from his door with 
far less compunction. No sorrows are so bitter as those that are without a trace 
of nobility. He bent down and picked her up in his arms. 

‘Listen, Ma Hla May,’ he said; T do.not hate you, you have done me no evil. 
It is I who have wronged you. But there is no help for it now. You must go 
home,- and later I will send you money. If you like you shall start a shop in the 
bazaar. You are young. This will not matter to you when you have money and 



i68 


Burmese Days 


can find yourself a husband.' 

e I am ruined!' she wailed again. ‘I shall kill myself. I shall jump off the jetty 
into the river. How can I live after this disgrace?’ 

He was holding her in his arms, almost caressing her. She was clinging close 
to him, her face hidden against his shirt, her body shaking with sobs. The scent 
of sandalwood floated into his nostrils. Perhaps even now she thought that 
with her arms around him and her body against his she could renew her power 
over him. He disentangled himself gently, and then, seeing that she did not fall 
on her knees again, stood apart from her. 

‘That is enough. You must go now. And look, I will give you the fifty rupees 
I promised you.’ 

He dragged his tin uniform case from under the bed and took out five ten- 
rupee notes. She stowed them silently in the bosom of her ingyi. Her tears had 
ceased flowing quite suddenly. Without speaking she went into the bathroom 
for a moment, and came out with her face washed to its natural brown, and her 
hair and dress rearranged. She looked sullen, but not hysterical any longer. 
‘For the last time, thakin * you will not take me back? That is your last word?’ 
‘Yes. I cannot help it.’ 

‘Then I am going, thakin.’’ 

‘Very well. God go with you.’ 

Leaning against the wooden pillar of the veranda, he watched her walk down 
the path in the strong sunlight. She walked very upright, with bitter offence in 
the carriage of her back and head. It was true what she had said, he had robbed 
her of her youth. His knees were trembling uncontrollably. Ko S’la came 
behind him, silent-footed. He gave a little deprecating cough to attract Flory’s 
attention. 

‘What’s the matter now?’ 

‘The holy one’s breakfast is getting cold.’ 

‘I don’t want any breakfast. Get me something to drink-gin.’ 

Where is the life that late I led? 



Like long curved needles threading through embroidery, the two canoes that 
carried Flory and Elizabeth threaded their way up the creek that led inland 
from the eastern bank of the Irrawaddy. It was the day of the shooting trip-a 
short afternoon trip, for they could not stay a night in the jungle together. 
They were to shoot for a couple of hours in the comparative cool of the 
evening, and be back at Kyauktada in time for dinner. 

The canoes, each hollowed out of a single tree-trunk, glided swiftly, hardly 
rippling the dark brown water. Water hyacinth with profuse spongy foliage 



Burmese Days 169 

and blue flowers had choked the stream so that the channel was only a winding 
ribbon four feet wide. The light filtered, greenish, through interlacing boughs. 
Sometimes one could hear parrots scream overhead, but no wild creatures 
showed themselves, except once a snake that swam hurriedly away and 
disappeared among the water hyacinth. 

‘How long before we get to the village?’ Elizabeth called back to Flory, He 
was in a larger canoe behind, together with Flo and Ko S’la, paddled by a 
wrinkly old woman dressed in rags. 

‘How far, grandmama?’ Flory asked the canoe-woman. 

The old woman took her cigar out of her mouth and rested her paddle on her 
knees to think. ‘The distance a man can shout,’ she said after reflection. 

‘About half a mile,’ Flory translated. 

They had come two miles. Elizabeth’s back was aching. The canoes were 
liable to upset at a careless moment, and you had to sit bolt upright on the 
narrow backless seat, keeping your feet as well as possible out of the bilge, with 
dead prawns in it, that sagged to and fro at the bottom. The Burman who 
paddled Elizabeth was sixty years old, half naked, leaf-brown, with a body as 
perfect as that of a young man. His face was battered, gentle and humorous. 
His black cloud of hair, finer than that of most Burmans, was knotted loosely 
over one ear, with a wisp or two tumbling across his cheek. Elizabeth was 
nursing her uncle’s gun across her knees. Flory had offered to take it, but she 
had refused; in reality, the feel of it delighted her so much that she could not 
bring herself to give it up. She had never had a gun in her hand until today. She 
was wearing a rough skirt with brogue shoes and a silk shirt like a man’s, and 
she knew that with her Terai hat they looked well on her. She was very happy, 
in spite of her aching back and the hot sweat that tickled her face, and the large, 
speckled mosquitoes that hummed round her ankles. 

The stream narrowed and the beds of water hyacinth gave place to steep 
banks of glistening mud, like chocolate. Rickety thatched huts leaned far out 
over the stream, their piles driven into its bed. A naked boy was standing 
between two of the huts, flying a green beetle on a piece of thread like a kite. He 
yelled at the sight of the Europeans, whereat more children appeared from 
nowhere. The old Burman guided the canoe to a jetty made of a single palm- 
trunk laid in the mud-it was covered with barnacles and so gave foothold-and 
sprang out and helped Elizabeth ashore. The others followed with the bags and 
cartridges, and Flo, as she always did on these occasions, fell into the mud and 
sank as deep as the shoulder. A skinny old gentleman wearing a magenta paso, 
with a mole on his cheek from which four yard-long grey hairs sprouted, came 
forward shikoing and cuffing the heads of the children who had gathered round 
the jetty. 

‘The village headman,’ Flory said. 

The old man led the way to his house, walking ahead with an extraordinary 
crouching gajt, like a letter L upside down— the result of rheumatism 
combined with the constant shikoing needed in a minor Government official. 
A mob of children marched rapidly after the Europeans, and more and mote 
dogs, all yapping and causing Flo to shrink against Flory’s heels. In the 



jjo Burmese Days 

doorway of every hut clusters of moonlike, rustic faces gaped at the 
‘Ingaleikma’. The village was darkish under the shade of broad leaves. In the 
rains the creek would flood, turning the lower parts of the village into a squalid 
wooden Venice where the villagers stepped from their front doors into their 
canoes. 

The headman’s house was a little bigger than the others, and it had a 
corrugated iron roof, which, in spite of the intolerable dm it made during the 
rains, was the pride of the headman’s life. He had foregone the building of a 
pagoda, and appreciably lessened his chances of Nirvana, to pay for it. He 
hastened up the steps and gently kicked in the ribs a youth who was lying 
asleep on the veranda. Then he turned and shikoed again to the Europeans, 
asking them to come inside. 

‘Shall we go in?’ Flory said. ‘I expect we shall have to wait half an hour.’ 

‘Couldn’t you tell him to bring some chairs out on the veranda?’ Elizabeth 
said. After her experience in Li Yeik’s house she had privately decided that she 
would never go inside a native house again, if she could help it. 

There was a fuss inside the house, and the headman, the youth and some 
women dragged forth two chairs decorated in an extraordinary manner with 
red hibiscus flowers, and also some begonias growing in kerosene tins. It was 
evident that a sort of double throne had been prepared within for the 
Europeans. When Elizabeth had sat down the headman reappeared with a 
teapot, a bunch of very long, bright green bananas, and six coal-black cheroots. 
But when he had poured her out a cup of tea Elizabeth shook her head, for the 
tea looked, if possible, worse even than Li Yeik’s. 

The headman looked abashed and rubbed his nose. He turned to Flory and 
asked him whether the young thakin-ma would like some milk in her tea. He 
had heard that Europeans drank milk in their tea. The villages should, if it 
were desired, catch a cow and milk it. However, Elizabeth still refused the tea; 
but she was thirsty, and she asked Flory to send for one of the bottles of soda- 
water that Ko S’ la had brought in his bag. Seeing this, the headman retired, 
feeling guiltily that his preparations had been insufficient, and left the veranda 
to the Europeans. 

. Elizabeth was still nursing her gun on her knees, while Flory leaned against 
the veranda rail pretending to smoke one of the headman’s cheroots. Elizabeth 
was pining for the shooting to begin. She plied Flory with innumerable 
questions. 

‘How soon can we start out? Do you think we’ve got enough cartridges? 
How many beaters shall we take? Oh, I do so hope we have some luck! You do 
think we’ll get something, don’t you?’ 

‘Nothing wonderful, probably. We’re bound to get a few pigeons, and 
perhaps jungle fowl. They’re out of season, but it doesn’t matter shooting the 
cocks. They say there’s a leopard round here, that killed a bullock almost in the 
village last week.’ 

‘Oh, a leopard! How lovely if we could shoot it!’ 

‘It’s very unlikely, I’m afraid. The only rule with this shooting in Burma is 
to hope for nothing. It’s invariably disappointing. The jungles teem with 



Burmese Days iji 

game, but as often as not you don’t even get a chance to fire your gun.’ 

‘Why is that?’ 

‘The jungle is so thick. An animal may be five yards away and quite 
invisible, and half the time they manage to dodge back past the beaters. Even 
when you see them it’s only for a flash of a second. And again, there’s water 
everywhere, so that no animal is tied down to one particular spot. A tiger, for 
instance, will roam hundreds of miles if it suits him. And with all the game 
there is, they need never come back to a kill if there’s anything suspicious 
about it. Night after night, when I was a boy, I’ve sat up over horrible stinking 
dead cows, waiting for tigers that never came.’ 

Elizabeth wriggled her shoulder-blades against the chair. It was a movement 
that she made sometimes when she was deeply pleased. She loved Flory, really 
loved him, when he talked like this. The most trivial scrap of information 
about shooting thrilled her. If only he would always talk about shooting, 
instead of about books and Art and that mucky poetry! In a sudden burst of 
admiration she decided that Flory was really quite a handsome man, in his 
way. He looked so splendidly manly, with his pagri-cloxh. shirt open at the 
throat, and his shorts and puttees and shooting boots! And his face, lined, 
sunburned, like a soldier’s face. He was standing with his birthmarked cheek 
away from her. She pressed him to go on talking. 

‘Do tell me some more about tiger-shooting. It’s so awfully interesting!’ 

He described the shooting, years ago, of a mangy old man-eater who had 
killed one of his coolies. The wait in the mosquito-ridden machan; the tiger’s 
eyes approaching through the dark jungle, like great green lanterns; the 
panting, slobbering noise as he devoured the coolie’s body, tied to a stake 
below. Flory told it all perfunctorily enough-did not the proverbial Anglo- 
Indian bore always talk about tiger-shooting?-but Elizabeth wriggled her 
shoulders delightedly once more. He did not realize how such talk as this 
reassured her and made up for -all the times when he had bored her and 
disquieted her. Six shock-headed youths came down the path, carrying dahs 
over their shoulders, and headed by a stringy but active old man with grey hair. 
They halted in front of the headman’s house, and one of them uttered a hoarse 
whoop, whereat the headman appeared and explained that these were the 
beaters. They were ready to start now, if the young thakin~ma did not find it 
too hot. 

They set out. The side of the village away from the creek was protected by a 
hedge of cactus six feet high and twelve thick. One went up a narrow lane of 
cactus, then along a rutted, dusty bullock-cart track, with bamboos as tall as 
flagstaff's growing densely on either side. The beaters marched rapidly ahead in 
single file, each with his broad dah laid along his forearm. The old hunter was 
marching just in front of Elizabeth. His longyi was hitched up like a loin-cloth, 
and his meagre thighs were tattooed with dark blue patterns, so intricate that 
he might have been wearing drawers of blue lace. A bamboo the thickness of a 
man’s wrist had fallen and hung across the path. The leading beater severed it 
with an upward flick of his dah; the prisoned water gushed out of it with a 
diamond-flash- After half a mile they reached the open fields, and everyone 



j j2 Burmese Days 

was sweating, for they had walked fast and the sun was savage. 

‘That’s where we’re going to shoot, over there,’ Flory said. 

He pointed across the stubble, a wide dust-coloured plain, cut up into 
patches of an acre or two by mud boundaries. It was horribly flat, and lifeless 
save for the snowy egrets. At the far edge a jungle of great trees rose abruptly, 
like a dark green cliff. The beaters had gone across to a small tree like a 
hawthorn twenty yards away. One of them was on his knees, shikoing to the 
tree and gabbling, while the old hunter poured a bottle of some cloudy liquid 
on to the ground. The others stood looking on with serious, bored faces, like 
men in church. 

‘What are those men doing?’ Elizabeth said. 

‘Only sacrificing to the local gods. Nats, they call them-a kind of dryad. 
They’re praying to him to bring us good luck.’ 

The hunter came back and in a cracked voice explained that they were to 
beat a small patch of scrub over to the right before proceeding to the main 
jungle. Apparently the Nat had counselled this. The hunter directed Flory and 
Elizabeth where to stand, pointing with his dah. The six beaters plunged into 
the scrub; they would make a detour and beat back towards the paddy-fields. 
There were some bushes of the wild rose thirty yards from the jungle’s edge, 
and Flory and Elizabeth took cover behind one of these, while Ko S’la 
squatted down behind another bush a little distance away, holding Flo’s collar 
and stroking her to keep her quiet. Flory always sent Ko S’la to a distance 
when he was shooting, for he had an irritating trick of clicking his tongue if a 
shot was missed. Presently there was a far-off echoing sound-a sound of 
tapping and strange hollow cries; the beat had started. Elizabeth at once began 
trembling so uncontrollably that she could not keep her gun-barrel still A 
wonderful bird, a little bigger than a thrush, with grey wings and body of 
blazing scarlet, broke from the trees and came towards them with a dipping 
flight. The tapping and the cries came nearer. One of the bushes at the jungle’s 
edge waved violently-some large animal was emerging, Elizabeth raised her 
gun and tried to steady it. But it was only a naked yellow beater, dah in hand. 
He saw that he had emerged and shouted to the others to join him. 

Elizabeth lowered her gun. ‘What’s happened?’ 

‘Nothing. The beat’s over.’ 

‘So there was nothing there!’ she cried in bitter disappointment. 

‘Never mind, one never gets anything the first beat. We’ll have better luck 
next time.’ 

They crossed the lumpy stubble, climbing over the mud boundaries that 
divided the fields, and took up their position opposite the high green wall of the 
jungle. Elizabeth had already learned how to load her gun. This time the beat 
had hardly started when Ko S’la whistled sharply. 

‘Look out!’ Flory cried. ‘Quick, here they come!’ 

A flight of green pigeons were dashing towards them at incredible speed, 
forty yards up. They were like a handful of catapulted stones whirling through 
the sky. Elizabeth was helpless with excitement. For a moment she could not 
move, then she flung her barrel into the air, somewhere in the direction of the 



Burmese Days ij 3 

birds, and tugged violently at the trigger. Nothing happened-she was pulling 
at the trigger-guard. Just as the birds passed overhead she found the triggers 
and pulled both of them simultaneously There was a deafening roar and she 
was thrown backwards a pace with her collar-bone almost broken She had 
fired thirty yards behind the birds. At the same moment she saw Flory turn 
and level his gun. Two of the pigeons, suddenly checked m their flight, swirled 
over and dropped to the ground like arrows. Ko S’la yelled, and he and Flo 
raced after them. 

‘Look out!’ said Flory, ‘here’s an imperial pigeon. Let’s have him!’ 

A large heavy bird, with flight much slower than the others, was flapping 
overhead. Elizabeth did not care to fire after her previous failure. She watched 
Flory thrust a cartridge into the breech and raise his gun, and the white plume 
of smoke leapt up from the muzzle. The bird planed heavily down, his wing 
broken. Flo and Ko S’la came running excitedly up, Flo with the big imperial 
pigeon in her mouth, and Ko S’la grinning and producing two green pigeons 
from his Kachin bag. 

Flory took one of the little green corpses to show to Elizabeth. ‘Look at it. 
Aren’t they lovely things? The most beautiful bird in Asia.’ 

Elizabeth touched its smooth feathers with her finger-tip. It filled her with 
bitter envy, because she had not shot it. And yet it was curious, but she felt 
almost an adoration for Flory now that she had seen how he could shoot. 

‘Just look at its breast-feathers; like a jewel. It’s murder to shoot them. The 
Burmese say that when you kill one of these birds they vomit, meaning to say, 
“Look, here is all I possess, and I’ve taken nothing of yours. Why do you kill 
me?” I’ve never seen one do it, I must admit.’ 

‘Are they good to eat?’ 

‘Very. Even so, I always feel it’s a shame to kill them.’ 

‘I wish I could do it like you do!’ she said enviously. 

‘It’s only a knack, you’ll soon pick it up. You know how to hold your gun, 
and that’s more than most people do when they start.’ 

However, at the next two beats, Elizabeth could hit nothing. She had 
learned not to fire both barrels at once, but she was too paralysed with 
excitement ever to take aim. Flory shot several more pigeons, and a small 
bronze-wing dove with back as green as verdigris. The jungle fowl were too 
cunning to show themselves, though one could hear them cluck-clucking all 
round, and once or twice the sharp trumpet-call of a cock. They were getting 
deeper into the jungle now. The light was greyish, with dazzling patches of 
sunlight. Whichever way one looked one’s view was shut in by the 
multitudinous ranks of trees, and the tangled bushes and creepers that 
struggled round their bases like the sea round the piles of a pier. It was so 
dense, like a bramble bush extending mile after mile, that one’s eyes were 
oppressed by it. Some of the creepers were huge, like serpents. Flory and 
Elizabeth struggled along narrow game-tracks, up slippery banks, thorns 
tearing at their clothes. Both their shirts were drenched with sweat. It was 
stifling hot, with a scent of crushed leaves. Sometimes for minutes together 
invisible cidadas would keep up a shrill, metallic pinging like the twanging of a 



ijq Burmese Days 

steel guitar, and then, by stopping, make a silence that startled one. 

As they were walking to the fifth beat they came to a great peepul tree in 
which, high up, one could hear imperial pigeons cooing. It was a sound like the 
far-off lowing of cows. One bird fluttered out and perched alone on the 
topmost bough, a small greyish shape. 

‘Try a sitting shot,’ Flory said to Elizabeth. ‘Get your sight on him and pull 
off without waiting. Don’t shut your left eye.’ 

Elizabeth raised her gun, which had begun trembling as usual. The beaters 
halted in a group to watch, and some of them could not refrain from clicking 
their tongues; they thought it queer and rather shocking to see a woman handle 
a gun. With a violent effort of will Elizabeth kept her gun still for a second, and 
pulled the trigger. She did not hear the shot; one never does when it has gone 
home. The bird seemed to jump upwards from the bough, then down it came, 
tumbling over and over, and stuck in a fork ten yards up. One of the beaters 
laid down his dah and glanced appraisingly at the tree; then he walked to a 
great creeper, thick as a man’s thigh and twisted like a stick of barley sugar, 
that hung far out from a bough. He ran up the creeper as easily as though it had 
been a ladder, walked upright along the broad bough, and brought the pigeon 
to the ground. He put it limp and warm into Elizabeth’s hand. 

She could hardly give it up, the feel of it so ravished her. She could have 
kissed it, hugged it to her breast. All the men, Flory and Ko S’la and the 
beaters, smiled at one another to see her fondling the dead bird. Reluctantly, 
she gave it to Ko S’la to put in the bag. She was conscious of an extraordinary 
desire to fling her arms round Flory’s neck and kiss him; and in some way it 
was the killing of the pigeon that made her feel this. 

After the fifth beat the hunter explained to Flory that they must cross a 
clearing that was used for growing pineapples, and would beat another patch 
of jungle beyond. They came out into sunlight, dazzling after the jungle 
gloom. The clearing was an oblong of an acre or two hacked out of the jungle 
like a patch mown in long grass, with the pineapples, prickly cactus-like plants, 
growing in rows, almost smothered by weeds. A low hedge of thorns divided 
the field in the middle. They had nearly crossed the field when there was a 
sharp cock-a-doodle-doo from beyond the hedge. 

‘Oh, listen!’ said Elizabeth, stopping. ‘Was that a jungle cock?’ 

‘Yes. They come out to feed about this time.’ 

‘Couldn’t we go and shoot him?’ 

‘We’ll have a try if you like. They’re cunning beggars. Look, we’ll stalk up 
the hedge until we get opposite where he is. We’ll have to go without making a 
sound.’ 

He sent Ko S’la and the beaters on, and the two of them skirted the field and 
crept along the hedge. They had to bend double to keep themselves out of 
sight. Elizabeth was in front. The hot sweat trickled down her face, tickling her 
upper lip, and her heart was knocking violently. She felt Flory touch her heel 
from behind. Both of them stood upright and looked over the hedge together. 

Ten yards away a little cock the size of a bantam, was pecking vigorously at 
the ground. He was beautiful, with his long silky neck-feathers, bunched comb 



Burmese Days ij$ 

and arching, laurel-green tail. There were six hens with him, smaller brown 
birds, with diamond-shaped feathers like snake-scales on their backs. All this 
Elizabeth and Flory saw in the space of a second, then with a squawk and a 
whirr the birds were up and flying like bullets for the jungle. Instantly, 
automatically as it seemed, Elizabeth raised her gun and fired. It was one of 
those shots where there is no aiming, no consciousness of the gun in one’s 
hand, when one’s mind seems to fly behind the charge and drive it to the mark. 
She knew the bird was doomed even before she pulled the trigger. He tumbled, 
showered feathers thirty yards away. ‘Good shot, good shot!’ cried Flory. In 
their excitement both of them dropped their guns, broke through the thorn 
hedge and raced side by side to where the bird lay. 

‘Good shot!’ Flory repeated, as excited as she ‘By Jove, I’ve never seen 
anyone kill a flying bird their first day, never! You got your gun off like 
lightning. It’s marvellous!’ 

They were kneeling face to face with the dead bird between them. With a 
shock they discovered that their hands, his right and her left, were clasped 
tightly together. They had run to the place hand-in-hand without noticing it. 

A sudden stillness came on them both, a sense of something momentous that 
must happen. Flory reached across and took her other hand. It came 
yieldingly, willingly. For a moment they knelt with their hands clasped 
together. The sun blazed upon them and the warmth breathed out of their 
bodies; they seemed to be floating upon clouds of heat and joy. He took her by 
the upper arms to draw her towards him. 

Then suddenly he turned his head away and stood up, pulling Elizabeth to 
her feet. He let go of her arms. He had remembered his birthmark. He dared 
not do it. Not here, not in daylight! The snub it invited was too terrible. To 
cover the awkwardness of the moment he bent down and picked up the jungle 
cock. 

‘It was splendid,’ he said. ‘You don’t need any teaching. You can shoot 
already. We’d better get on to the next beat.’ 

They had just crossed the hedge and picked up their guns when there was a 
series of shouts from the edge of the jungle. Two of the beaters were running 
towards them with enormous leaps, waving their arms wildly in the air. 

‘What is it?’ Elizabeth said. 

‘I don’t know. They’ve seen some animal or other. Something good, by the 
look of them.’ 

‘Oh, hurrah! Come on!’ 

They broke into a run and hurried across the field, breaking through the 
pineapples and the stiff prickly weeds. Ko S’la and five of the beaters were 
standing in a knot all talking at once, and the other two were beckoning 
excitedly to Flory and Elizabeth. As they came up they saw in the middle of the 
group an old woman who was holding up her ragged longyi with one hand and 
gesticulating with a big cigar in the other. Elizabeth could hear some word that 
sounded like ‘Char’ repeated over and over again. 

‘What is it they’re saying?’ she said. 

The beaters came crowding round Flory, all talking eagerly and pointing 



j 7 6 Burmese Days 

into the jungle. After a few questions he waved his hand to silence them and 
turned to Elizabeth: 

‘I say, here’s a bit of luck! This old girl was coming through the jungle, and 
she says that at the sound of the shot you fired just now, she saw a leopard run 
across the path. These fellows know where he’s likely to hide. If we’re quick 
they may be able to surround him before he sneaks away, and drive him out. 
Shall we try it?’ 

‘Oh, do let’s! Oh, what awful fun! How lovely, how lovely if we could get 
that leopard!’ 

‘You understand it’s dangerous? We’ll keep close together and it’ll probably 
be all right, but it’s never absolutely safe on foot. Are you ready for that?’ 

‘Oh, of course, of course! I’m not frightened. Oh, do let’s be quick and start!’ 

‘One of you come with us, and show us the way,’ he said to the beaters. ‘Ko 
S’la, put Flo on the leash and go with the others. She’ll never keep quiet with 
us. We’ll have to hurry,’ he added to Elizabeth. 

Ko S’la and the beaters hurried off along the edge of the jungle. They would 
strike in and begin beating farther up. The other beater, the same youth who 
had climbed the tree after the pigeon, dived into the jungle, Flory and 
Elizabeth following. With short rapid steps, almost running, he led them 
through a labyrinth of game-tracks. The bushes trailed so low that sometimes 
one had almost to crawl, and creepers hung across the path like trip-wires. The 
ground was dusty and silent underfoot. At some landmark in the jungle the 
beater halted, pointed to the ground as a sign that this spot would do, and put 
his finger on his lips to enjoin silence. Flory took four SG cartridges from his 
pockets and took Elizabeth’s gun to load it silently. 

There was a faint rustling behind them, and they all started. A nearly naked 
youth with a pellet-bow, come goodness knows whence, had parted the 
bushes. He looked at the beater, shook his head and pointed up the path. There 
was a dialogue of signs between the two youths, then the beater seemed to 
agree. Without speaking all four stole forty yards along the path, round a bend, 
and halted again. At the same moment a frightful pandemonium of yells, 
punctuated by barks from Flo, broke out a few hundred yards away. 

Elizabeth felt the beater’s hand on her shoulder, pushing her downwards. 
They all four squatted down under cover of a prickly bush, the Europeans in 
front, the Burmans behind. In the distance there was such a tumult of yells and 
the rattle of dahs against tree-trunks that one could hardly believe six men 
could make so much noise. The beaters were taking good care that the leopard 
should not turn back upon them. Elizabeth watched some large, pale yellow 
ants marching like soldiers over the thorns of the bush. One fell on to her hand 
and crawled up her forearm. She dared not move to brush it away. She was 
praying silently, ‘Please God, let the leopard come! Oh please, God, let the 
leopard come!’ 

There was a sudden loud pattering on the leaves. Elizabeth raised her gun, 
but Flory shook his head sharply and pushed the barrel down again. A jungle 
fowl scuttled across the path with long noisy strides. 

The yells of the beaters seemed hardly to come any closer, and this end of the 



Burmese Days 777 

jungle the silence was like a pall. The ant on Elizabeth’s arm bit her painfully 
and dropped to the ground. A dreadful despair had begun to form in her heart; 
the leopard was not coming, he had slipped away somewhere, they had lost 
him. She almost wished they had never heard of the leopard, the 
disappointment was so agonizing. Then she felt the beater pinch her elbow. He 
was craning his face forward, his smooth, dull yellow cheek only a few inches 
from her own; she could smell the coco-nut oil in his hair. His coarse lips were 
puckered as in a whistle; he had heard something. Then Flory and Elizabeth 
heard it too, the faintest whisper, as though some creature of air were gliding 
through the jungle, just brushing the ground with its foot. At the same 
moment the leopard’s head and shoulders emerged from the undergrowth, 
fifteen yards down the path. 

He stopped with his forepaws on the path. They could see his low, fiat-eared 
head, his bare eye-tooth and his thick, terrible forearm. In the shadow he did 
not look yellow but grey. He was listening intently. Elizabeth saw Flory spring 
to his feet, raise his gun and pull the trigger instantly. The shot roared, and 
almost simultaneously there was a heavy crash as the brute dropped fiat in the 
weeds. ‘Look out!’ Flory cried, ‘he’s not done for!’ He fired again, and there 
was a fresh thump as the shot went home. The leopard gasped. Flory threw 
open his gun and felt in his pocket for a cartridge, then flung all his cartridges 
on to the path and fell on his knees, searching rapidly among them. 

‘Damn and blast it!’ he cried. ‘There isn’t a single SG among them. Where 
in hell did I put them?’ 

The leopard had disappeared as he fell. He was thrashing about in the 
undergrowth like a great, wounded snake, and crying out with a snarling, 
sobbing noise, savage and pitiful. The noise seemed to be coming nearer. 
Every cartridge Flory turned up had 6 or 8 marked on the end. The rest of the 
large-shot cartridges had, in fact, been left with Ko S’la. The crashing and 
snarling were now hardly five yards away, but they could see nothing, the 
jungle was so thick. 

The two Burmans were crying out ‘Shoot! Shoot! Shoot!’ The sound of 
‘Shoot! Shoot!’ got farther away-they were skipping for the nearest climbable 
trees. There was a crash in the undergrowth so close that it shook the bush by 
which Elizabeth was standing. 

‘By God, he’s almost on us!’ Flory said. ‘We must turn him somehow. Let 
fly at the sound.’ 

Elizabeth raised her gun. Her knees were knocking like castanets, but her 
hand was as steady as stone. She fired rapidly, once, twice. The crashing noise 
receded. The leopard was crawling away, crippled but swift, and still invisible. 

‘Well done! You’ve scared him,’ Flory said. 

‘But he’s getting away! He’s getting away!’ Elizabeth cried, dancing about in 
agitation. She made to follow him. Flory jumped to his feet and pulled her 
back. 

‘No fear! You stay here. Wait!’ 

He slipped two of the small-shot cartridges into his gun and ran after the 
sound of the leopard. For a moment Elizabeth could not see either beast or 



jjS Burmese Days 

man, then they reappeared in a bare patch thirty yards away. The leopard was 
writhing along on his belly, sobbing as he went. Flory levelled his gun and 
fired at four yards’ distance. The leopard jumped like a cushion when one hits 
it, then rolled over, curled up and lay still. Flory poked the body with his gun- 
barrel. It did not stir. 

‘It’s all right, he’s done for,’ he called. ‘Come and have a look at him.’ 

The two Burmans jumped down from their tree, and they and Elizabeth 
went across to where Flory was standing. The leopard-it was a male-was 
lying curled up with his head between his forepaws. He looked much smaller 
than he had looked alive; he looked rather pathetic, like a dead kitten. 
Elizabeth’s knees were still quivering. She and Flory stood looking down at the 
leopard, close together, but not clasping hands this time. 

It was only a moment before Ko S’la and the others came up, shouting with 
glee. Flo gave one sniff at the dead leopard, then down went her tail and she 
bolted fifty yards, whimpering. She could not be induced to come near him 
again. Everyone squatted down round the leopard and gazed at him. They 
stroked his beautiful white belly, soft as a hare’s, and squeezed his broad pugs 
to bring out the claws, and pulled back his black lips to examine the fangs. 
Presently two of the beaters cut down a tall bamboo and slung the leopard upon 
it by his paws, with his long tail trailing down, and then they marched back to 
the village in triumph. There was no talk of further shooting, though the light 
still held. They were all, including the Europeans, too anxious to get home and 
boast of what they had done. 

Flory and Elizabeth walked side by side across the stubble field. The others 
were thirty yards ahead with the guns and the leopard, and Flo was slinking 
after them a long way in the rear. The sun was going down beyond the 
Irrawaddy. The light shone level across the field, gilding the stubble stalks, 
and striking into- their faces with a yellow, gentle beam. Elizabeth’s shoulder 
was almost touching Flory ’s as they walked. The sweat that had drenched their 
shirts had dried again. They did not talk much. They were happy with that 
inordinate happiness that comes of exhaustion and achievement, and with 
which nothing else in life-no joy of either the body or the mind-is even able to 
be comparecL 

‘The leopard skin is yours,’ Flory said as they approached the village. 

‘Oh, but you shot him!’ 

‘Never mind, you stick to the skin. By Jove, I wonder how many of the 
women in this country would have kept their heads like you did! I can just see 
them screaming and fainting. I’ll get the skin cured for you in Kyauktada jail. 
There’s a convict there who can cure skins as soft as velvet. He’s doing a seven- 
year sentence, so he’s had time to learn the job.’ 

‘Oh well, thanks awfully.’ 

No more was said for the present. Later, when they had washed off the sweat 
and dirt, and were fed and rested, they would meet again at the Club. They 
made no rendezvous, but it was understood between them that they would 
meet. Also, it was understood that Flory would ask Elizabeth to marry him, 
though nothing was said about this either. 



B urmese Days 179 

At the village Flory paid the beaters eight annas each, superintended the 
skinning of the leopard, and gave the headman a bottle of beer and two of the 
imperial pigeons. The skin and skull were packed into one of the canoes. All 
the whiskers had been stolen, in spite of Ko S’la’s efforts to guard them. Some 
young men of the village carried off the carcass in order to eat the heart and 
various other organs, the eating of which they believed would make them 
strong and swift like the leopard 



When Flory arrived at the Club he found the Lackersteens in an unusually 
morose mood. Mrs Lackersteen was sitting, as usual, in the best place under 
the punkah, and was reading the Civil List, the Debrett of Burma. She was in a 
bad temper with her husband, who had defied her by ordering a ‘large peg’ as 
soon as he reached the Club, and was further defying her by reading the 
Pink’un. Elizabeth was alone in the stuffy little library, turning over the pages 
of an old copy of Blackwood 3 s. 

Since parting with Flory, Elizabeth had had a very disagreeable adventure. 
She had come out of her bath and was half-way through dressing for dinner 
when her uncle had suddenly appeared in her room-pretext, to hear some 
more about the day’s shooting-and begun pinching her leg in a way that 
simply could not be misunderstood. Elizabeth was horrified. This was her first 
introduction to the fact that' some men are capable of making love to their 
nieces. We live and learn. Mr Lackersteen had tried to carry the thing off as a 
joke, but he was too clumsy and too nearly drunk to succeed. It was fortunate 
that his wife was out of hearing, or there might have been a first-rate scandal. 

After this, dinner was an uncomfortable meal. Mr Lackersteen was sulking. 
What rot it was, the way these women put on airs and prevented you from 
having a good time! The girl was pretty enough to remind him of the 
illustrations in La Vie Parisienne , and damn it ! wasn’t he paying for her keep? 
It was a shame. But for Elizabeth the position was very serious. She was 
penniless and had no home except her uncle’s house. She had come eight 
thousand miles to stay here. It would be terrible if after only a fortnight her 
uncle’s house were to be made uninhabitable for her. 

Consequently, one thing was much surer m her mind than it had been: that 
if Flory asked her to marry him (and he would, there was little doubt of it), she 
would say yes. At another time it just possible that she would have decided 
differently. This afternoon, under the spell of that glorious, exciting, 
altogether ‘lovely’ adventure, she had come near to loving Flory; as near as, in 
his particular case, she was able to come. Yet even after that, perhaps, her 
doubts would have returned. For there had always been something dubious 
about Flory; his age, his birthmark, his queer, perverse way of talking~that 



180 Burmese Days 

‘highbrow’ talk that was at once unintelligible and disquieting There had been 
days when she had even disliked him. But now her uncle’s behaviour had 
turned the scale. Whatever happened she had got to escape from her uncle’s 
house, and that soon. Yes, undoubtedly she would marry Flory when he asked 
her! 

He could see her answer in her face as he came into the library. Her air was 
gentler, more yielding than he had known it. She was wearing the same lilac- 
coloured frock that she had worn that first morning when he met her, and the 
sight of the familiar frock gave him courage It seemed to bring her nearer to 
him, taking away the strangeness and the elegance that had sometimes 
unnerved him. 

He picked up the magazine she had been reading and made some remark; for 
a moment they chattered in the banal way they so seldom managed to avoid. It 
is strange how the drivelling habits of conversation will persist into almost all 
moments. Yet even as they chattered they found themselves drifting to the 
door and then outside, and presently to the big frangipani tree by the tennis 
court. It was the night of the full moon. Flaring like a white-hot coin, so 
brilliant that it hurt one’s eyes, the moon swam rapidly upwards in a sky of 
smoky blue, across which drifted a few wisps of yellowish cloud. The stars 
were all invisible. The croton bushes, by day hideous things like jaundiced 
laurels, were changed by the moon into jagged black and white designs like 
fantastic wood-cuts. By the compound fence two Dravidian coolies were 
walking down the road, transfigured, their white rags gleaming. Through the 
tepid air the scent streamed from the frangipani trees like some intolerable 
compound out of a penny-in-the-slot machine. 

‘Look at the moon, just look at it!’ Flory said. ‘It’s like a white sun. It’s 
brighter than an English winter day.’ 

Elizabeth looked up into the branches of the frangipani tree, which the 
moon seemed to have changed into rods of silver. The light lay thick, as though 
palpable, on everything, crusting the earth and the rough bark of trees like 
some dazzling salt, and every leaf seemed to bear a freight of solid light, like 
snow. Even Elizabeth, indifferent to such things, was astonished. 

‘It’s wonderful! You never see moonlight like that at Home. It’s so-so-’ No 
adjective except ‘bright’ presenting itself, she was silent. She had a habit of 
leaving her sentences unfinished, like Rosa Dartle, though for a different 
reason. 

‘Yes, the old moon does her best in this country. How that tree does stink, 
doesn’t it? Beastly, tropical thing! I hate a tree that blooms all the year round, 
don’t you?’ 

He was talking half abstractedly, to cover the time till the coolies should be 
out of sight. As they disappeared he put his arm round Elizabeth’s shoulder, 
and then, when she did not start or speak, turned her round and drew her 
against him. Her head came against his breast, and her short hair grazed his 
lips. He put his hand under her chin and lifted her face up to meet his. She was 
not wearing her spectacles. 

‘You don’t mind?’ 



Burmese Days 181 

‘No.’ 

‘I mean, you don't mind my-this thing of mine?’ he shook his head slightly 
to indicate the birthmark. He could not kiss her without first asking this 
question. 

‘No, no. Of course not ’ 

A moment after their mouths met he felt her bare arms settle lightly round 
his neck. They stood pressed together, against the smooth trunk of the 
frangipani tree, body to body, mouth to mouth, for a minute or more. The 
sickly scent of the tree came mingling with the scent of Elizabeth’s hair. And 
the scent gave him a feeling of stultification, of remoteness from Elizabeth, 
even though she was in his arms. All that that alien tree symbolized for him, his 
exile, the secret, wasted years-it was like an unbridgeable gulf between them. 
How should he ever make her understand what it was that he wanted of her? 
He disengaged himself and pressed her shoulders gently against the tree, 
looking down at her face, which he could see very clearly though the moon was 
behind her. 

‘It’s useless trying to tell you what you mean to me,’ he said. ‘“What you 
mean to me!” These blunted phrases! You don’t know, you can’t know, how 
much I love you. But I’ve got to try and tell you. There’s so much I must tell 
you. Had we better go back to the Club? They may come looking for us. We 
can talk on the veranda.’ 

‘Is my hair very untidy?’ she said 

‘It’s beautiful.’ 

‘But has it got untidy? Smooth it for me, would you, please?’ 

She bent her head towards him, and he smoothed the short, cool locks with 
his hand. The way she bent her head to him gave him a curious feeling of 
intimacy, far more intimate than the kiss, as though he had already been her 
husband. Ah, he must have her, that was certain! Only by marrying her could 
his life be salvaged. In a moment he would ask her. They walked slowly 
through the cotton bushes and back to the Club, his arm still round her 
shoulder. 

‘We can talk on the veranda,’ he repeated. ‘Somehow, we’ve never really 
talked, you and I. My God, how I’ve longed all these years for somebody to 
talk to! How I could talk to you, interminably, interminably! That sounds 
boring. I’m afraid it will be boring. I must ask you to put up with it for a little 
while.’ 

She made a sound of remonstrance at the word ‘boring’. 

‘No, it is boring, I know that. We Anglo-Indians are always looked on as 
bores. And we are bores. But we can’t help it. You see, there’s-how shall I 
say?-a demon inside us driving us to talk. We walk about under a load of 
memories which we long to share and somehow never can. It’s the price we pay 
for coming to this country.’ 

They were fairly safe from interruption on the side veranda, for there was no 
door opening directly upon it. Elizabeth had sat down with her arms on the 
little wicker table, but Flory remained strolling back and forth, with his hands 
in his coatpockets, stepping into the moonlight that streamed beneath the 



1S2 Burmese Days 

eastern eaves of the veranda, and back into the shadows. 

‘I said just now that I loved you. Love! The word’s been used till it’s 
meaningless. But let me try to explain. This afternoon when you were there 
shooting with me, I thought, my God! here at last is somebody who can share 
my life with me, but really share it, really live it with me-do you see-’ 

He was going to ask her to marry him-indeed, he had intended to ask her 
without more delay. But the words were not spoken yet; instead, he found 
himself talking egoistically on and on. He could not help it. It was so important 
that she should understand something of what his life in this country had been; 
that she should grasp the nature of the loneliness that he wanted her to nullify. 
And it was so devilishly difficult to explain. It is devilish to suffer from a pain 
that is all but nameless. Blessed are they who are stricken only with classifiable 
diseases! Blessed are the poor, the sick, the crossed in love, for at least other 
people know what is the matter with them and will listen to their belly-achings 
with sympathy. But who that has not suffered it understands the pain of exile? 
Elizabeth watched him as he moved to and fro, in and out of the pool of 
moonlight that turned his silk coat to silver. Her heart was still knocking from 
the kiss, and yet her thoughts wandered as he talked. Was he going to ask her to 
marry him? He was being so slow about it! She was dimly aware that he was 
saying something about loneliness. Ah, of course! He was telling her about the 
loneliness she would have to put up with in the jungle, when they were 
married. He needn’t have troubled. Perhaps you did get rather lonely in the 
jungle sometimes? Miles from anywhere, no cinemas, no dances, no one but 
each other to talk to, nothing to do in the evenings except read-rather a bore, 
that. Still, you could have a gramophone. What a difference it would make 
when those new portable radio sets got out to Burma! She was about to say this 
when he added: 

‘Have I made myself at all clear to you? Have you got some picture of the life 
we live here? The foreignness, the solitude, the melancholy! Foreign trees, 
foreign flowers, foreign landscapes, foreign faces. It’s all as alien as a different 
planet. But do you see-and it’s this that I so want you to understand-do you 
see, it mightn’t be so bad living on a different planet, it might even be the most 
interesting thing imaginable, if you had even one person to share it with. One 
person who could see it with eyes something like your own. This country’s 
been a kind of solitary hell to me-it’s so to most of us-and yet I tell you it 
could be a paradise if one weren’t alone. Does all this seem quite meaningless?’ 

He had stopped beside the table, and he picked up her hand. In the half- 
darkness he could see her face only as a pale oval, like a flower, but by the 
feeling of her hand he knew instantly that she had not understood a word of 
what he was saying. How should she, indeed? It was so futile, this meandering 
talk! He would say to her at once. Will you marry me? Was there not a lifetime 
to talk in? He took her other hand and drew her gently to her feet. 

‘Forgive me all this rot I’ve been talking.’ 

‘It’s all right,’ she murmured indistinctly, expecting that he was about to 
kiss her. 

*Nq, it’s rot talking like that. Some things will go into words, some won’t. 



Burmese Days 18 3 

Besides, it was an impertinence to go belly-aching on and on about myself. But 
I was trying to lead up to something. Look, this is what I wanted to say. Will-’ 
c £ 7 z 2 -a-beth!’ 

It was Mrs Lackersteen’s high-pitched, plaintive voice, calling from within 
the Club. 

‘Elizabeth? Where are you, Elizabeth?’ 

Evidently she was near the front door-would be on the veranda in a 
moment. Flory pulled Elizabeth against him. They kissed hurriedly. He 
released her, only holding her hands. 

‘Quickly, there’s just time. Answer me this. Will you-’ 

But that sentence never got any further. At the same moment something 
extraordinary happened under his feet-the floor was surging and rolling like a 
sea-he was staggering, then dizzily falling, hitting his upper arm a thump as 
the floor rushed towards him. As he lay there he found himself jerked violently 
backwards and forwards as though some enormous beast below were rocking 
the whole building on its back. 

The drunken floor righted itself very suddenly, and Flory sat up, dazed but 
not much hurt. He dimly noticed Elizabeth sprawling beside him, and screams 
coming from within the Club. Beyond the gate two Burmans were racing 
through the moonlight with their long hair streaming behind them. They were 
yelling at the top of their voices: 

‘Nga Yin is shaking himself! Nga Yin is shaking himself.’ 

Flory watched them unintelligently. Who was Nga Yin? Nga is the prefix 
given to criminals. Nga Yin must be a dacoit. Why was he shaking himself? 
Then he remembered. Nga Yin was a giant supposed by the Burmese to be 
buried, like Typhaeus, beneath the crust of the earth. Of course! It was an 
earthquake. 

‘An earthquake!’ he exclaimed, and he remembered Elizabeth and moved to 
pick her up. But she was already sitting up, unhurt, and rubbing the back of 
her head. 

‘Was that an earthquake?’ she said in a rather awed voice, 

Mrs Lackersteen’s tall form came creeping round the corner of the veranda, 
clinging to the wall like some elongated lizard. She was exclaiming 
hysterically: 

‘Oh dear, an earthquake! Oh, what a dreadful shock! I can’t bear it— my heart 
won’t stand it! Oh dear, oh dear! An earthquake!’ 

Mr Lacker steen tottered after her, with a strange ataxic step caused partly 
by earth-tremors and partly by gin. 

‘An earthquake, dammit!’ he said. 

Flory and Elizabeth slowly picked themselves up. They all went inside, with 
that queer feeling in the soles of the feet that one has when one steps from a 
rocking boat on to the shore. The old butler was hurrying from the servants’ 
quarters, thrusting his pagri on his head as he came, and a troop of twittering 
chokras after him. 

‘Earthquake, sir, earthquake!’ he bubbled eagerly. 

‘I should damn well think it was an earthquake,’ said Mr Lackersteen as he 



184 Burmese Days 

lowered himself cautiously into a chair. ‘Here, get some drinks, butler. By 
God, I could do with a nip of something after that.’ 

They all had a nip of something. The butler, shy yet beaming, stood on one 
leg beside the table, with the tray in his hand. ‘Earthquake, sir, big earthquake!’ 
he repeated enthusiastically. He was bursting with eagerness to talk; so, for 
that matter, was everyone else. An extraordinary joie de vivre had come over 
them all as soon as the shaky feeling departed from their legs. An earthquake is 
such fun when it is over. It is so exhilarating to reflect that you are not, as you 
well might be, lying dead under a heap of ruins. With one accord they all burst 
out talking: ‘My dear, I’ve never had such a shock-I fell absolutely flat on my 
back- 1 thought it was a dam’ pariah dog scratching itself under the floor- 1 
thought it must be an explosion somewhere-’ and so on and so forth; the usual 
earthquake-chatter. Even the butler was included in the conversation. 

T expect you can remember ever so many earthquakes can’t you butler?’ 
said Mrs Lackersteen, quite graciously, for her. 

‘Oh yes, madam, many earthquakes! 1887, 1899, 1906, 1912-many, many I 
can remember, madam!’ 

‘The 1912 one was a biggish one,’ Flory said. 

‘Oh, sir, but 1906 was bigger! Very bad shock, sir! And big heathen idol in 
the temple fall down on top of the thathanabaing , that is Buddhist bishop, 
madam, which the Burmese say mean bad omen for failure of paddy crop and 
foot-and-mouth disease. Also in 1887 my first earthquake I remember, when I 
was a little chokra , and Major Maclagan sahib was lying under the table and 
promising he sign the teetotal pledge tomorrow morning. He not know it was 
an earthquake. Also two cows was killed by falling roofs,’ etc., etc. 

The Europeans stayed in the Club till midnight, and the butler popped into 
the room as many as half a dozen times, to relate a new anecdote. So far from 
snubbing him, the Europeans even encouraged him to talk. There is nothing 
like an earthquake for drawing people together. One more tremor, or perhaps 
two, and they would have asked the butler to sit down at table with them. 

Meanwhile, Flory’s proposal went no further. One cannot propose marriage 
immediately after an earthquake. In any case, he did not see Elizabeth alone for 
the rest of that evening. But it did not matter, he knew that she was his now. In 
the morning there would be time enough. On this thought, at peace in his 
mind, and dog-tired after the long day, he went to bed. 



i6 


The vultures in the big pyinkado trees by the cemetery flapped from their 
dung-whitened branches, steadied themselves on the wing, and climbed by 
vast spirals into the upper air. It was early, but Flory was out already. He was 
going down to the Club, to wait until Elizabeth came and then ask her formally 
to marry him. Some instinct, which he did not understand, prompted him to 
do it before the other Europeans returned from the jungle. 

As he came out of the compound gate he saw that there was a new arrival at 
Kyauktada. A youth with a long spear like a needle in his hand was cantering 
across the maidan on a white pony. Some Sikhs, looking like sepoys, ran after 
him, leading two other ponies, a bay and a chestnut, by the bridle. When he 
came level with him Flory halted on the road and shouted good morning. He 
had not recognized the youth, but it is usual in small stations to make strangers 
welcome. The other saw that he was hailed, wheeled his pony negligently 
round and brought it to the side of the road. He was a youth of about twenty- 
five, lank but very straight, and manifestly a cavalry officer. He had one of 
those rabbit-like faces common among English soldiers, with pale blue eyes 
and a little triangle of fore-teeth visible between the lips; yet hard, fearless and 
even brutal in a careless fashion-a rabbit, perhaps, but a tough and martial 
rabbit. He sat his horse as though he were part of it, and he looked offensively 
young and fit. His fresh face was tanned to the exact shade that went with his 
light-coloured eyes, and he was as elegant as a picture with his white buckskin 
topi and his polo-boots that gleamed like an old meerschaum pipe. Flory felt 
uncomfortable in his presence from the start. 

‘How d’you do?’ said Flory. ‘Have you just arrived?’ 

‘Last night, got in by the late train.’ He had a surly, boyish voice. ‘I’ve been 
sent up here with a company of men to stand by in case your local bad-mashes 
start any trouble. My name’s Verrall-Military Police,’ he added, not, 
however, inquiring Flory’s name in return. 

‘Oh yes. We heard they were sending somebody. Where are you putting up?’ 
‘Dak bungalow, for the time being. There was some black beggar staying 
there when I got in last night- Excise Officer or something. I booted him out. 
This is a filthy hole, isn’t, it?’ he said’ with a backward movement of his head, 
indicating the whole of Kyauktada. 

‘I suppose it’s like the rest of these small stations. Are you staying long?’ 
‘Only a month or so, thank God. Till the rains break. What a rotten maidan 
you’ve got here, haven’t you? Pity they can’t keep this stuff cut,’ he added. 



j86 Burmese Days 

swishing the dried-up grass with the point of his spear. ‘Makes it so hopeless 
for polo or anything.’ 

‘I’m afraid you won’t get any polo here,’ Flory said. ‘Tennis is the best we 
can manage. There are only eight of us all told, and most of us spend three- 
quarters of our time in the jungle.’ 

‘Christ! What a hole!’ 

After this there was a silence. The tall, bearded Sikhs stood in a group round 
their horses’ heads, eyeing Flory without much favour. It was perfectly clear 
that Verral was bored with the conversation and wanted to escape. Flory had 
never in his life felt to completely de trop, or so old and shabby. He noticed that 
Verrall’s pony was a beatiful Arab, a mare, with proud neck and arching, 
plume-like tail; a lovely milk-white thing, worth several thousands of rupees. 
Verrall had already twitched the bridle to turn away, evidently feeling that he 
had talked enough for one morning. 

‘That’s a wonderful pony of yours, 5 Flory said. 

‘She’s not bad, better than these Burma scrubs. I’ve come out to do a bit of 
tent-pegging. It’s hopeless trying to knock a polo ball about in this muck. Hey, 
Hira Singh!’ he called, and turned his pony away. 

The sepoy holding the bay pony handed his bridle to a companion, ran to a 
spot forty yards away, and fixed a narrow boxwood peg in the ground. Verral 
took no further notice of Flory. He raised his spear and poised himself as 
though taking aim at the peg, while the Indians backed their horses out of the 
way and stood watching critically. With a just perceptible movement Verrall 
dug his knees into the pony’s sides. She bounded forward like a bullet from a 
catapult. As easily as a centaur the lank, straight youth leaned over in the 
saddle, lowered his spear and plunged it clean through the peg. One of the 
Indians muttered gruffly ‘ Shabash /’ Verrall raised his spear behind him in the 
orthodox fashion, and then, pulling his horse to a canter, wheeled round and 
handed the transfixed peg to the sepoy. 

Verrall rode twice more at the peg, and hit it each time. It was done with 
matchless grace and with extraordinary solemnity. The whole group of men, 
Englishman and Indians, were concentrated upon the business of hitting the 
peg as though it had been a religious ritual. Flory still stood watching, 
disregarded-Verrall’s face was one of those that are specially constructed for 
ignoring unwelcome strangers-but from the very fact that he had been 
snubbed unable to tear himself away. Somehow, Verrall had filled him with a 
horrible sense of inferiority. He was trying to think of some pretext for 
renewing the conversation, when he looked up the hillside and saw Elizabeth, 
in pale blue, coming out of her uncle’s gate. She must have seen the third 
transfixing of the peg. His heart stirred painfully. A thought occurred to him, 
one of those rash thoughts that usually lead to trouble. He called to Verrall, 
who was a few yards away from him, and pointed with his stick. 

‘Do these other two know how to do it?’ 

Verrall looked over his shoulder with a surly air. He had expected Flory to 
go away after being ignored. 

‘What?’ 



Burmese Days i8j 

‘Can these other two do it?’ Flory repeated. 

‘The chestnut’s not bad. Bolts if you let him, though.’ 

‘Let me have a shot at the peg, would you?’ 

‘All right,’ said Verrall ungraciously. ‘Don’t go and cut his mouth to bits.’ 

A sepoy brought the pony, and Flory pretended to examine the curb-chain. 
In reality he was temporizing until Elizabeth should be thirty or forty yards 
away. He made up his mind that he would stick the peg exactly at the moment 
when she passed (it is easy enough on the small Burma ponies, provided that 
they will gallop straight), and then ride up to her with it on his point. That was 
obviously the right move. He did not want her to think that that pink-faced 
young whelp was the only person who could ride. He was wearing shorts, 
which are uncomfortable to ride in, but he knew that, like nearly everyone, he 
looked his best on horseback. 

Elizabeth was approaching. Flory stepped into the saddle, took the spear 
from the Indian and waved it in greeting to Elizabeth. She made no response, 
however. Probably she was shy in front of Verrall. She was looking away, 
towards the cemetery, and her cheeks were pink. 

‘ ChalOy said Flory to the Indian, and then dug his knees into the horse’s 
sides. 

The very next instant, before the horse had taken to bounds, Flory found 
himself hurtling through the air, hitting the ground with a crack that wrenched 
his shoulder almost out of joint, and rolling over and over. Mercifully the spear 
fell clear of him. He lay supine, with a blurred vision of blue sky and floating 
vultures. Then his eyes focused on the khaki pagri and dark face of a Sikh, 
bearded to the eyes, bending over him. 

‘What’s happened?’ he said in English, and he raised himself painfully on his 
elbow. The Sikh made some gruff answer and pointed. Flory saw the chestnut 
pony careering away over the maidan, with the saddle under its belly. The 
girth had not been tightened, and had slipped round; hence his fall. 

When Flory sat up he found that he was in extreme pain. The right shoulder 
of his shirt was tom open and already soaking with blood, and he could feel 
more blood oozing from his cheek. The hard earth had grazed him. His hat, 
too, was gone. With a deadly pang he remembered Elizabeth, and he saw her 
coming towards him, barely ten yards away, looking straight at him as he 
sprawled there so ignominiously. My God, my God! he thought, O my God, 
what a fool I must look! The thought of it even drove away the pain of the fall. 
He clapped a hand over his birth-mark, though the other cheek was the 
damaged one. 

‘Elizabeth! Hullo, Elizabeth! Good morning!’ 

He had called out eagerly, appealingly, as one does when one is conscious of 
looking a fool. She did not answer, and what was almost incredible, she walked 
on without pausing even for an instant, as though she had neither seen nor 
heard him. 

‘Elizabeth!’ he called again, taken aback; ‘did you see my fall? The saddle 
slipped. The fool of a sepoy hadn’t-’ 

There was no question that she had heard him now. She turned her face full 



1 88 Burmese Days 

upon him for a moment, and looked at him and through him as though he had 
not existed. Then she gazed away into the distance beyond the cemetery. It 
was terrible. He called after her in dismay- 

‘ Elizabeth! I say, Elizabeth!’ 

She passed on without a word, without a sign, without a look. She was 
walking sharply down the road, with a click of heels, her back turned upon 
him. 

The sepoys had come round him now, and Verrall, too, had ridden across to 
where Flory lay. Some of the sepoys had saluted Elizabeth; Verrall had 
ignored her, perhaps not seeing her Flory rose stiffly to his feet. He was badly 
bruised, but no bones were broken. The Indians brought him his hat and stick, 
but they did not apologize for their carelessness. They looked faintly 
contemptuous, as though thinking that he had only got what he deserved. It 
was conceivable that they had loosened the girth on purpose. 

‘The saddle slipped,’ said Flory in the weak, stupid way that one does at 
such moments. 

‘Why the devil couldn’t you look at it before you got up?’ said Verrall briefly. 
‘You ought to know these beggars aren’t to be trusted.’ 

Having said which he twitched his bridle and rode away, feeling the incident 
closed. The sepoys followed him without saluting Flory. When Flory reached 
his gate he looked back and saw that the chestnut pony had already been caught 
and re-saddled, and Verrall was tent-pegging upon it. 

The fall had so shaken him that even now he could hardly collect his 
thoughts. What could have made her behave like that? She had seen him lying 
bloody and in pain, and she had walked past him as though he had been a dead 
dog. How could it have happened? Had it happened? It was incredible. Could 
she be angry with him? Could he have offended her in any way? All the 
servants were waiting at the compound fence. They had come out to watch the 
tent-pegging, and every one of them had seen his bitter humiliation. Ko S’la 
ran part of the way down the hill to meet him, with concerned face. 

‘The god has hurt himself? Shall I carry the god back to the house?’ 

‘No,’ said the god. ‘Go and get me some whisky and a clean shirt.’ 

When they got back to the house Ko S’la made Flory sit down on the bed 
and peeled off his torn shirt which the blood had stuck to his body. Ko S’la 
clicked his tongue. 

‘ Ah ma lay? These cuts are full of dirt. You ought not to play these children’s 
games on strange ponies, thakin. Not at your age. It is too dangerous.’ 

‘The saddle slipped,’ Flory said. 

‘Such games,’ pursued Ko S’la, ‘are all very well for the young police officer. 
But you are no longer young, thakin. A fall hurts at your age. You should take 
more care of yourself.’ 

‘Do you take me for an old man?’ said Flory angrily. His shoulder was 
smarting abominably. 

‘You are thirty-five, thakin/ said Ko S’la politely but firmly. 

It was all very humiliating. Ma Pu and Ma Yi, temporarily at peace, had 
brought a pot of some dreadful mess which they declared was good for cuts. 



Burmese Days 189 

Flory told Ko S’la privately to throw it out of the window and substitute 
boracic ointment. Then, while he sat in a tepid bath and Ko S’la sponged the 
dirt out of his grazes, he puzzled helplessly, and, as his head grew clearer, with 
a deeper and deeper dismay, over what had happened. He had offended her 
bitterly, that was clear. But, when he had not even seen her since last night, 
how could he have offended her? And there was no even plausible answer. 

He explained to Ko S’la several times over that his fall was due to the saddle 
slipping. But Ko S’la, though sympathetic, clearly did not believe him. To the 
end of his days, Flory perceived, the fall would be attributed to his own bad 
horsemanship. On the other hand, a fortnight ago, he had won undeserved 
renown by putting to flight the harmless buffalo. Fate is even-handed, after a 
fashion. 



Flory did not see Elizabeth again until he went down to the Club after dinner. 
He had not, as he might have done, sought her out and demanded an 
explanation. His face unnerved him when he looked at it in the glass. With the 
birthmark on one side and the graze on the other it was so woebegone, so 
hideous, that he dared not show himself by daylight. As he entered the Club 
lounge he put his hand over his birthmark— pretext, a mosquito bite on the 
forehead. It would have been more than his nerve was equal to, not to cover his 
birthmark at such a moment. However, Elizabeth was not there. 

Instead, he tumbled into an unexpected quarrel. Ellis and Westfield had just 
got back from the jungle, and they were sitting drinking, in a sour mood. News 
had come from Rangoon that the editor of the Burmese Patriot had been given 
only four months’ imprisonment for his libel against Mr Macregor, and Ellis 
was working himself up into a rage over this light sentence. As soon as Flory 
came in Ellis began baiting him with remarks about ‘that little nigger Very- 
slimy’. At the moment the very thought of quarrelling made Flory yawn, but 
he answered incautiously, and there was an argument. It grew heated, and 
after Ellis had called Flory a nigger’s Nancy Boy and Flory had replied in kind, 
Westfield too lost his temper. He was a good-natured man, but Flory’s Bolshie 
ideas sometimes annoyed him. He could never understand why, when there 
was so clearly a right and a wrong opinion about everything, Flory always 
seemed to delight in choosing the wrong one. He told Flory ‘not to start talking 
like a damned Hyde Park agitator’, and then read him a snappish little sermon, 
taking as his text the five chief beatitudes of the pukka sahib, namely: 


Keeping up our prestige. 

The firm hand (without the velvet glove), 



igo Burmese Days 

We white men must hang together. 

Give them an inch and they’ll take an ell, and 
Espnt de Corps 

All the while his anxiety to see Elizabeth was so gnawing at Flory’s heart that 
he could hardly hear what was said to him. Besides, he had heard it all so often, 
so very often-a hundred times, a thousand times it might be, since his first 
week in Rangoon, when his burra sahib (an old Scotch gin-soaker and great 
breeder of racing ponies, afterwards warned off the turf for some dirty 
business of running the same horse under two different names) saw him take 
off his topi to pass a native funeral and said to him reprovingly: ‘Remember 
laddie, always remember, we are sahiblog and they are dirrt!’ It sickened him, 
now, to have to listen to such trash. So he cut Westfield short by saying 
blasphemously: 

‘Oh, shut up! I’m sick of the subject. Veraswami’s a damned good fellow-a 
damned sight better than some white men I can think of. Anyway, I’m going to 
propose his name for the Club when the general meeting comes. Perhaps he’ll 
liven this bloody place up a bit.’ 

Whereat the row would have become serious if it had not ended as most rows 
ended at the Club— with the appearance of the butler, who had heard the raised 
voices. 

‘Did master call, sir?’ 

‘No. Go to hell,’ said Ellis morosely. 

The butler retired, but that was the end of the dispute for the time being. At 
this moment there were footsteps and voices outside; the Lacker steens were 
arriving at the Club. 

When they entered the lounge, Flory could not even nerve himself to look 
directly at Elizabeth; but he noticed that all three of them were much more 
smartly dressed than usual. Mr Lackersteen was even wearing a dinner- 
jacket-white, because of the season-and was completely sober. The boiled 
shirt and piqui waistcoat seemed to hold him upright and stiffen his moral fibre 
like a breastplate. Mrs Lackersteen looked handsome and serpentine in a red 
dress. In some indefinable way all three gave the impression that they were 
waiting to receive some distinguished guest. 

When drinks had been called for, and Mrs Lackersteen had usurped the 
place under the punkah, Flory took a chair on the outside of the group. He 
dared not accost Elizabeth yet. Mrs Lackersteen had begun talking in an 
extraordinary, silly manner about the dear Prince of Wales, and putting on an 
accent like a temporarily promoted chorus-girl playing the part of a duchess in 
a musical comedy. The others wondered privately what the devil was the 
matter with her. Flory had stationed himself almost behind Elizabeth. She was 
wearing a yellow frock, cut very short as the fashion then was, with 
champagne-coloured stockings and slippers to match, and she carried a big 
ostrich-feather fan. She looked so modish, so adult, that he feared her more 
than he had ever done. It was unbelievable that he had ever kissed her. She was 
talking easily to all the others at once, and now and again he dared to put a 
word into the general conversation; but she never answered him directly, and 



Burmese Days 191 

whether or not she meant to ignore him, he could not tell. 

‘Well/ said Mrs Lackersteen presently, ‘and who’s for a rubbah?’ 

She said quite distinctly a ‘rubbah’. Her accent was growing more 
aristocratic with every word she uttered. It was unaccountable. It appeared 
that Ellis, Westfield and Mr Lackersteen were for a ‘rubbah’. Flory refused as 
soon as he saw that Elizabeth was not playing. Now or never was his chance to 
get her alone. When they all moved for the card-room, he saw with a mixture of 
fear and relief that Elizabeth came last. He stopped in the doorway, barring her 
path. He had turned dreadly pale. She shrank from him a little. 

‘Excuse me/ they both said simultaneously. 

‘One moment/ he said, and do what he would his voice trembled. ‘May I 
speak to you? You don’t mind- there’s something I must say.’ 

‘Will you please let me pass, Mr Flory?’ 

‘Please! Please! We’re alone now. You won’t refuse just to let me speak?’ 
‘What is it, then?’ 

‘It’s only this. Whatever I’ve done to offend you-please tell me what it is. 
Tell me and let me put it right. I’d sooner cut my hand off than offend you. Just 
tell me, don’t let me go on not even knowing what it is.’ 

‘I really don’t know what you’re talking about. “Tell you how you’ve 
offended me?” Why should you have offended me?’ 

‘But I must have! After the way you behaved!’ 

‘“After the way I behaved?” I don’t know what you mean. I don’t know why 
you’re talking in this extraordinary way at all.’ 

‘But you won’t even speak to me! This morning you cut me absolutely dead.’ 
‘Surely I can do as I like without being questioned?’ 

‘But please, please! Don’t you see, you must see, what it’s like for me to be 
snubbed all of a sudden. After all, only last night you-’ 

She turned pink. ‘I think it’s absolutely-absolutely caddish of you to 
mention such things!’ 

‘I know, I know. I know all that. But what else can I do? You walked past me 
this morning as though I’d been a stone. I know that I’ve offended you in some 
way. Can you blame me if I want to know what it is that I’ve done?’ 

He was, as usual, making it worse with every word he said. He perceived that 
whatever he had done, to be made to speak of it seemed to her worse than the 
thing itself. She was not going to explain. She was going to leave him in the 
dark-snub him and then pretend that nothing had happened; the natural 
feminine move. Nevertheless he urged her again; 

‘Please tell me. I can’t let everything end between us like this.’ 

‘ “End between us”? There was nothing to end/ she said coldly. 

The vulgarity of this remark wounded him, and he said quickly: 

‘That wasn’t like you, Elizabeth! It’s not generous to cut a man dead after 
you’ve been kind to him, and then refuse even to tell him the reason. You 
might be straightforward with me. Please tell me what it is that I’ve done.’ 

She gave him an oblique, bitter look, bitter not because of what he had done, 
but because he had made her speak of it. But perhaps she was anxious to end 
the scene, and she said: 



1 92 Burmese Days 

‘Well then, if you absolutely force me to speak of it-’ 

‘Yes?’ 

‘I’m told that at the very same time as you were pretending to- well, when 
you were . . . with me-oh, it’s too beastly! I can’t speak of it.’ 

‘Go on.’ 

‘I’m told that you’re keeping a Burmese woman. And now, will you please let 
me pass?’ 

With that she sailed-there was no other possible word for it-she sailed past 
him with a swish of her short skirts, and vanished into the card-room. And he 
remained looking after her, too appalled to speak, and looking unutterably 
ridiculous. 

It was dreadful. He could not face her after that. He turned to hurry out of 
the Club, and then dared not even pass the door of the card-room, lest she 
should see him. He went into the lounge, wondering how to escape, and finally 
climbed over the veranda rail and dropped on to the small square of lawn that 
ran down to the Irrawaddy. The sweat was running from his forehead. He 
could have shouted with anger and distress. The accursed luck of it! To be 
caught out over a thing like that. ‘Keeping a Burmese woman’-and it was nof 
even true! But much use it would ever be to deny it. Ah, what damned, evil 
chance could have brought it to her ears? 

But as a matter of fact, it was no chance. It had a perfectly sound cause, 
which was also the cause of Mrs Lackersteen’s curious behaviour at the Club 
this evening. On the previous night, just before the earthquake, Mrs 
Lackersteen had been reading the Civil List. The Civil List (which tells you 
the exact income of every official in Burma) was a source of inexhaustible 
interest to her. She was in the middle of adding up the pay and allowances of a 
Conservator of Forests whom she had once met in Mandalay, when it occurred 
to her to look up the name of Lieutenant Verrall, who, she had heard from Mr 
Macregor, was arriving at Kyauktada tomorrow with a hundred Military 
Policemen. When she found the name, she saw in front of it two words that 
startled her almost out of her wits. 

The words were ‘The Honourable’! 

The Honourable \ Lieutenants the Honourable are rare anywhere, rare as 
diamonds in the Indian Army, rare as dodos in Burma. And when you are the 
aunt of the only marriageable young woman within fifty miles, and you hear 
that a lieutenant the Honourable is arriving no later than tomorrow- well! 
With dismay Mrs Lackersteen remembered that Elizabeth was out in the 
garden with Flory-that drunken wretch Flory, whose pay was barely seven 
hundred rupees a month, and who, it was only too probable, was already 
proposing to her! She hastened immediately to call Elizabeth inside, but at this 
moment the earthquake intervened. However, on the way home there was an 
opportunity to speak. Mrs Lackersteen laid her hand affectionately on 
Elizabeth’s arm and said in the tenderest voice she had ever succeeded in 
producing: 

‘Of course you know, Elizabeth dear, that Flory is keeping a Burmese 
woman?’ 



Burmese Days 193 

For a moment this deadly charge actually failed to explode. Elizabeth was so 
new to the ways of the country that the remark made no impression on her. It 
sounded hardly more significant than ‘keeping a parrot’. 

‘Keeping a Burmese woman? What for?’ 

‘What /or? My dear! what does a man keep a woman for?’ 

And, of course, that was that. 

For a long time Flory remained standing by the river bank. The moon was 
up, mirrored in the water like a broad shield of electron. The coolness of the 
outer air had changed Flory’s mood. He had not even the heart to be angry any 
longer. For he had perceived, with the deadly self-knowledge and self-loathing 
that come to one at such a time, that what had happened served him perfectly 
right. For a moment it seemed to him that an endless procession of Burmese 
women, a regiment of ghosts, were marching past him in the moonlight. 
Heavens, what numbers of them! A thousand-no, but a full hundred at the 
least. ‘Eyes right!’ he thought despondently. Their heads turned towards him, 
but they had no faces, only featureless discs. He remembered a blue longyi 
here, a pair of ruby ear-rings there, but hardly a face or a name. The gods are 
just and of our pleasant vices (pleasant, indeed!) make instruments to plague 
us. He had dirtied himself beyond redemption, and this was his just 
punishment. 

He made his way slowly through the croton bushes and round the 
clubhouse. He was too saddened to feel the full pain of the disaster yet. It 
would begin hurting, as all deep wounds do, long afterwards. As he passed 
through the gate something stirred the leaves behind him. He started. There 
was a whisper of harsh Burmese syllables. 

‘Pike-san pay-like ! Pike-san pay-like !’ 

He turned sharply. The ‘ pike-san pay-like 3 (‘Give me the money’) was 
repeated. He saw a woman standing under the shadow of the gold mohur tree. 
It was Ma Hla May. She stepped out into the moonlight warily, with a hostile 
air, keeping her distance as though afraid that he would strike her. Her face 
was coated with powder, sickly white in the moon, and it looked as ugly as a 
skull, and defiant. 

She had given him a shock, ‘What the devil are you doing here?’ he said 
angrily in English. 

‘ Pike-san pay -like /’ 

‘What money? What do you mean? Why are you following me about like 
this?’ 

‘ Pike-san pay-like /’ she repeated almost in a scream. ‘The money you 
promised me, thakin. You said you would give me more money. I want it now, 
this instant!’ 

‘How can I give it you now? You shall have it next month. I have given you a 
hundred and fifty rupees already.’ 

To his alarm she began shrieking ‘ Pike-san pay-likeV and a number of 
similar phrases almost at the top of her voice. She seemed on the verge of 
hysterics. The volume of noise that she produced was startling. 

‘Be quiet! They’ll hear you in the Club!’ he exclaimed, and was instantly 



i$4 Burmese Days 

sorry for putting the idea into her head. 

‘Aha! Now I know what will frighten you! Give me the money this instant, or 
I will scream for help and bring them all out here Quick, now, or I begin 
screaming!’ 

‘You bitch!’ he said, and took a step towards her. She sprang nimbly out of 
reach, whipped off her slipper, and stood defying him. 

‘Be quick! Fifty rupees now and the rest tomorrow. Out with it! Or I give a 
scream they can hear as far as the bazaar!’ 

Flory swore. This was not the time for such a scene. Finally he took out his 
pocket-book, found twenty-five rupees in it, and threw them on to the ground. 
Ma Hla May pounced on the notes and counted them. 

‘I said fifty rupees, thakvn!’ 

‘How can I give it you if I haven’t got it? Do you think I carry hundreds of 
rupees about with me?’ 

‘I said fifty rupees!’ 

‘Oh, get out of my way!’ he said in English, and pushed past her. 

But the wretched woman would not leave him alone. She began to follow 
him up the road like a disobedient dog, screaming out c Pike-san pay-like! Pike- 
san pay-like!’ as though mere noise could bring the money into existence. He 
hurried, partly to draw her away from the Club, partly in hopes of shaking her 
off, but she seemed ready to follow him as far as the house if necessary. After a 
while he could not stand it any longer, and he turned to drive her back. 

‘Go away this instant! If you follow me any farther you shall never have 
another anna.’ 

‘Pike-san pay-like!’ 

‘You fool,’ he said, ‘what good is this doing? How can I give you the money 
when I have not another pice on me?’ 

‘That is a likely story!’ 

He felt helplessly in his pockets. He was so wearied that he would have given 
her anything to be rid of her. His fingers encountered his cigarette-case, which 
was of gold. He took it out. 

‘Here, if I give you this will you go away? You can pawn it for thirty rupees.’ 

Ma Hla May seemed to consider, then said sulkily, ‘Give it me.’ 

He threw the cigarette-case on to the grass beside the road. She grabbed it 
and immediately sprang back clutching it to her ingyi , as though afraid that he 
would take it away again. He turned and made for the house, thanking God to 
be out of the sound of her voice. The cigarette-case was the same one that she 
had stolen ten days ago. 

At the gate he looked back, Ma Hla May was still standing at the bottom of 
the hill, a greyish figurine in the moonlight. She must have watched him up the 
hill like a dog watching a suspicious stranger out of sight. It was queer. The 
thought crossed his mind, as it had a few days earlier when she sent him the 
blackmailing letter, that her behaviour had been curious and unlike herself. 
She was showing a tenacity of which he would never have thought her 
capabie-almost, indeed, as though someone else were egging her on. 



i8 


After the row overnight Ellis was looking forward to a week of baiting Flory. 
He had nicknamed him Nancy-short for nigger’s Nancy Boy, but the women 
did not know that-and was already inventing wild scandals about him. Ellis 
always invented scandals about anyone with whom he had 
quarrelled-scandals which grew, by repeated embroideries, into a species of 
saga. Flory ’s incautious remark that Dr Veraswami was a ‘damned good 
fellow’ had swelled before long into a whole Daily Worker-fu\ of blasphemy 
and sedition. 

‘On my honour, Mrs Lackersteen,’ said Ellis-Mrs Lackersteen had taken a 
sudden dislike to Flory after discovering the great secret about Verrall, and she 
was quite ready to listen to Ellis’s tales-‘on my honour, if you’d been there last 
night and heard the things that man Flory was saying-well, it’d have made you 
shiver in your shoes!’ 

‘Really! You know, I always thought he had such curious ideas. What has he 
been talking about now? Not Socialism , I hope?’ 

‘Worse.’ 

There were long recitals. However, to Ellis’s disappointment, Flory had not 
stayed in Kyauktada to be baited. He had gone back to camp the day after his 
dismissal by Elizabeth. Elizabeth heard most of the scandalous tales about 
him. She understood his character perfectly now. She understood why it was 
that he had so often bored her and irritated her. He was a highbrow-her 
deadliest word-a highbrow, to be classed with Lenin, A. J. Cook and the dirty 
little poets in the Montparnasse cafds. She could have forgiven him even his 
Burmese mistress more easily than that. Flory wrote to her three days later; a 
weak, stilted letter, which he sent by hand-his camp was a day’s march from 
Kyauktada. Elizabeth did not answer. 

It was lucky for Flory that at present he was too busy to have time to think. 
The whole camp was at sixes and sevens since his long absence. Nearly thirty 
coolies were missing, the sick elephant was worse than ever, and a vast pile of 
teak logs which should have been sent off ten days earlier were still waiting 
because the engine would not work. Flory, a fool about machinery, straggled 
with the bowels of the engine until he was black with grease and Ko S’la told 
him sharply that white men ought not to do ‘coolie- work’. The engine was 
finally persuaded to ran, or at least to totter. The sick elephant was discovered 
to be suffering from tapeworms. As for the coolies, they had deserted because 
their supply of opium had been cut off-they would not stay in the jungle 



r$6 Burmese Days 

without opium, which they took as a prophylactic against fever. U Po Kyin, 
willing to do Flory a bad turn, had caused the Excise Officers to make a raid 
and seize the opium. Flory wrote to Dr Veraswami, asking for his help. The 
doctor sent back a quantity of opium, illegally procured, medicine for the 
elephant and a careful letter of instructions. A tapeworm measuring twenty- 
one feet was extracted. Flory was busy twelve hours a day. In the evening if 
there was no more to do he would plunge into the jungle and walk and walk 
until the sweat stung his eyes and his knees were bleeding from the briers. The 
nights were his bad time. The bitterness of what had happened was sinking 
into him, as it usually does, by slow degrees. 

Meanwhile, several days had passed and Elizabeth had not yet seen Verrall 
at less than a hundred yards’ distance. It had been a great disappointment 
when he had not appeared at the Club on the evening of his arrival. Mr 
Lackersteen was really quite angry when he discovered that he had been 
hounded into his dinner-jacket for nothing. Next morning Mrs Lackersteen 
made her husband send an officious note to the i&z&bungalow, inviting Verrall 
to the Club; there was no answer, however. More days passed, and Verrall 
made no move to join in the local society. He had even neglected his official 
calls, not even bothering to present himself at Mr Macgregor’s office. The 
du&bungalow was at the other end of the town, near the station, and he had 
made himself quite comfortable there There is a rule that one must vacate a 
daAbungalow after a stated number of days, but Verrall peaceably ignored it. 
The Europeans only saw him at morning and evening on the maidan. On the 
second day after his arrival fifty of his men turned out with sickles and cleared a 
large patch of the maidan, after which Verrall was to be seen galloping to and 
fro, practising polo strokes. He took not the smallest notice of any Europeans 
who passed down the road. Westfield and Ellis were furious, and even Mr 
Macgregor said that Verrall’s behaviour was ‘ungracious’. They would all 
have fallen at the feet of a lieutenant the Honourable if he had shown the 
smallest courtesy; as it was, everyone except the two women detested him from 
the start. It is always so with titled people, they are either adored or hated. If 
they accept one it is charming simplicity, if they ignore one it is loathsome 
snobbishness; there are no half-measures. 

Verrall was the youngest son of a peer, and not at all rich, but by the method 
of seldom paying a bill until a writ was issued against him, he managed to keep 
himself in the only things he seriously cared about: clothes and horses. He had 
come out to India in a British cavalry regiment, and exchanged into the Indian 
Army because it was cheaper and left him greater freedom for polo. After two 
years his debts were so enormous that he entered the Burma Military Police, in 
which it was notoriously possible to save money; however, he detested 
Burma-it is no country for a horseman-and he had already applied to go back 
to his regiment. He was the kind of soldier who can get exchanges when he 
wants them. Meanwhile, he was only to be in Kyauktada for a month, and he 
had no intention of mixing himself up with all the petty sahiblog of the district. 
He knew the society of those small Burma stations-a nasty, poodle-faking, 
horseless riffraff. He despised them. 



Burmese Days 197 

They were not the only people whom Verrall despised, however. His various 
contempts would take a long time to catalogue in detail. He despised the entire 
non-military population of India, a few famous polo players excepted. He 
despised the entire Army as well, except the cavalry. He despised all Indian 
regiments, infantry and cavalry alike. It was true that he himself belonged to a 
native regiment, but that was only for his own convenience. He took no 
interest in Indians, and his Urdu consisted mainly of swear-words, with all the 
verbs in the third person singular. His Military Policemen he looked on as no 
better than coolies ‘Christ, what God-forsaken swine!’ he was often heard to 
mutter as he moved down the ranks inspecting, with the old subahdar carrying 
his sword behind him. Verrall had even been in trouble once for his outspoken 
opinions on native troops. It was at a review, and Verrall was among the group 
of officers standing behind the general. An Indian infantry regiment 
approached for the march-past. 

‘The — Rifles,’ somebody said. 

‘And look at it,’ said Verrall in his surly boy’s voice. 

The white-haired colonel of the — Rifles was standing near. He flushed to 
the neck, and reported Verrall to the general. Verrall was reprimanded, but the 
general, a British Army officer himself, did not rub it in very hard. Somehow, 
nothing very serious ever did happen to Verrall, however offensive he made 
himself. Up and down India, wherever he was stationed, he left behind him a 
trail of insulted people, neglected duties and unpaid bills. Yet the disgraces 
that ought to have fallen on him never did. He bore a charmed life, and it was 
not only the handle to his name that saved him. There was something in his eye 
before which duns, burra memsahibs and even colonels quailed. 

It was a disconcerting eye, pale blue and a little protuberant, but 
exceedingly clear. It looked you over, weighed you in the balance and found 
you wanting, in a single cold scrutiny of perhaps five seconds. If you were the 
right kind of man-that is, if you were a cavalry officer and a polo 
player-Verrall took you for granted and even treated you with a surly respect; 
if you were any other type of man whatever, he despised you so utterly that he 
could not have hidden it even if he would. It did not even make any difference 
whether you were rich or poor, for in the social sense he was not more than 
normally a snob. Of course, like all sons of rich families, he thought poverty 
disgusting and that poor people are poor because they prefer disgusting habits. 
But he despised soft living. Spending, or rather owing, fabulous sums on 
clothes, he yet lived almost as ascetically as a monk. He exercised himself 
ceaselessly and brutally, rationed his drink and his cigarettes, slept on a camp 
bed (in silk pyjamas) and bathed in cold water in the bitterest winter. 
Horsemanship and physical fitness were the only gods he knew. The stamp of 
hoofs on the maidan, the strong, poised feeling of his body, wedded centaur- 
like to the saddle, the polo-stick springy in his hand-these were his religion, 
the breath of his life. The Europeans in Burma-boozing, womanizing, yellow- 
faced loafers-made him physically sick when he thought of their habits. As for 
social duties of all descriptions, he called them poodle-faking and ignored 
them. Women he abhorred. In his view they were a -kind of siren whose one 



j$8 Burmese Days 

aim was to lure men away from polo and enmesh them in tea-fights and tennis- 
parties. He was not, however, quite proof against women. He was young, and 
women of nearly all kinds threw themselves at his head; now and again he 
succumbed. But his lapses soon disgusted him, and he was too callous when 
the pinch came to have any difficulty about escaping. He had had perhaps a 
dozen such escapes during his two years in India. 

A whole week went by. Elizabeth had not even succeeded in making 
Verrall’s acquaintance. It was so tantalizing! Every day, morning and evening, 
she and her aunt walked down to the Club and back again, past the maidan; 
and there was Verrall, hitting the polo-balls the sepoys threw for him, ignoring 
the two women utterly. So near and yet so far! What made it even worse was 
that neither woman would have considered it decent to speak of the matter 
directly. One evening the polo-ball, struck too hard, came swishing through 
the grass and rolled across the road in front of them. Elizabeth and her aunt 
stopped involuntarily. But it was only a sepoy who ran to fetch the ball. Verrall 
had seen the women and kept his distance. 

Next morning Mrs Lackersteen paused as they came out of the gate. She had 
given up riding in her rickshaw lately. At the bottom of the maidan the 
Military Policemen were drawn up, a dust-coloured rank with bayonets 
glittering. Verrall was facing them, but not in uniform-he seldom put on his 
uniform for morning parade, not thinking it necessary with mere Military 
Policemen. The two women were looking at everything except Verrall, and at 
the same time, in some manner, were contriving to look at him. 

‘The wretched thing is, 5 said Mrs Lackersteen-this was & propos de bottes , 
but the subject needed no introduction- ‘the wretched thing is that I’m afraid 
your uncle simply must go back to camp before long. 5 

‘Must he really? 5 

‘I’m afraid so. It is so hateful in camp at this time of year! Oh, those 
mosquitoes! 5 

‘Couldn’t he stay a bit longer? A week, perhaps? 5 

‘I don’t see how he can. He’s been nearly a month in headquarters now. The 
firm would be furious if they heard of it. And of course both of us will have to 
go with him. Such a bore! The mosquitoes- simply terrible!’ 

Terrible indeed! To have to go away before Elizabeth had so much as said 
how-do-you-do to Verrall! But they would certainly have to go if Mr 
Lackersteen went. It would never do to leave him to himself. Satan finds some 
mischief still, even in the jungle. A ripple like fire ran down the line of sepoys; 
they were unfixing bayonets before marching away. The dusty rank turrifed 
left, saluted, and marched off in columns of fours. The orderlies were coming 
from the police lines with the ponies and polo-sticks, Mrs Lackersteen took a 
heroic decision. 

T think,’ she said, ‘we’ll take a short-cut across the maidan. It’s so much 
quicker than going right round by the road.’ 

It was quicker by about fifty yards, but no one ever went that way on foot, 
because of the grass-seeds that got into one’s stockings. Mrs Lackersteen 
plunged boldly into the grass, and then, dropping even the pretence of making 



Burmese Days 199 

for the Club, took a bee-line for Verrall, Elizabeth following. Either woman 
would have died on the rack rather than admit that she was doing anything but 
take a short-cut. Verrall saw them coming, swore, and reined in his pony He 
could not very well cut them dead now that they were coming openly to accost 
him. The damned cheek of these women! He rode slowly towards them with a 
sulky expression on his face, chivvying the polo-ball with small strokes. 

‘Good morning, Mr Verrall!’ Mrs Lackersteen called out in a voice of 
saccharine, twenty yards away 

‘Morning!’ he returned surlily, having seen her face and set her down as one 
of the usual scraggy old boiling-fowls of an Indian station. 

The next moment Elizabeth came level with her aunt. She had taken off her 
spectacles and was swinging her Terai hat on her hand. What did she care for 
sunstroke? She was perfectly aware of the prettiness of her cropped hair. A 
puff of wind-oh, those blessed breaths of wind, coming from nowhere in the 
stifling hot-weather days!-had caught her cotton frock and blown it against 
her, showing the outline of her body, slender and strong like a tree. Her sudden 
appearance beside the older, sun-scorched woman was a revelation to Verrall. 
He started so that the Arab mare felt it and would have reared on her hind legs, 
and he had to tighten the rein. He had not known until this moment, not 
having bothered to inquire, that there were any young women in Kyauktada. 

‘My niece,’ Mrs Lackersteen said. 

He did not answer, but he had thrown away the polo-stick, and he took off 
his topi. For a moment he and Elizabeth remained gazing at one another. Their 
fresh faces were unmarred in the pitiless light. The grass-seeds were tickling 
Elizabeth’s shins so that it was agony, and without her spectacles she could 
only see Verrall and his horse as a whitish blur. But she was happy, happy! Her 
heart bounded and the blood flowed into her face, dyeing it like a thin wash of 
aquarelle. The thought, ‘A peach, by Christ!’ moved almost fiercely through 
Verrall’s mind. The sullen Indians, holding the ponies’ heads, gazed curiously 
at the scene, as though the beauty of the two young people had made its 
impression even on them. 

Mrs Lackersteen broke the silence, which had lasted half a minute. 

‘You know, Mr Verrall,’ she said somewhat archly, '‘we think it rather 
unkind of you to have neglected us poor people all this time. When we’re so 
pining for a new face at the Club.’ 

He was still looking at Elizabeth when he answered, but the change in his 
voice was remarkable. 

‘I’ve been meaning to come for some days. Been so fearfully busy-getting 
my men into their quarters and all that. I’m sorry,’ he added-he was not in the 
habit of apologizing, but really, he had decided, this girl was rather an 
exceptional bit of stuff-Tm sorry about not answering your note.’ 

‘Oh, not at all! We quite understood. But we do hope we shall see you at the 
Club this evening! Because, you know,’ she concluded even more archly, ‘if 
you disappoint us any longer, we shall begin to think you rather a naughty 
young man!’ 

‘I’m sorry,’ he repeated. ‘I’ll be there this evening.’ 



200 Burmese Days 

There was not much more to be said, and the two women walked on to the 
Club. But they stayed barely five minutes. The grass-seeds were causing their 
shins such torment that they were obliged to hurry home and change their 
stockings at once. 

Verrall kept his promise and was at the Club that evening. He arrived a little 
earlier than the others, and he had made his presence thoroughly felt before 
being in the place five minutes. As Ellis entered the Club the old butler darted 
out of the card-room and waylaid him. He was in great distress, the tears 
rolling down his cheeks. 

‘Sir! Sir!’ 

‘What the devil’s the matter now!’ said Ellis. 

‘Sir! Sir! New master been beating me, sir!’ 

‘What?’ 

‘ Beating me sir!’ His voice rose on the ‘beating’ with a long tearful wail-‘be- 
e-e-eating!’ 

‘Beating you? Do you good. Who’s been beating you?’ 

‘New master, sir. Military Police sahib. Beating me with his foot, six-hereV 
He rubbed himself behind. 

‘Hell!’ said Ellis. 

He went into the lounge. Verrall was reading the Field, and invisible except 
for Palm Beach trouser-ends and two lustrous sooty-brown shoes. He did not 
trouble to stir at hearing someone else come into the room. Ellis halted. 

‘Here, you-what’s your name-Verrall!’ 

‘What?’ 

‘Have you been kicking our butler?’ 

Verrall’s sulky blue eye appeared round the comer of the Field , like the eye 
of a crustacean peering round a rock. 

‘What?’ he repeated shortly. 

‘I said, have you been kicking our bloody butler?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Then what the hell do you mean by it?’ 

‘Beggar gave me his lip. I sent him for a whisky and soda, and he brought it 
warm. I told him to put ice in it, and he wouldn’t-talked some bloody rot 
about saving the last pieces of ice. So I kicked his bottom. Serve him right.’ 

Ellis turned quite grey. He was furious. The butler was a piece of Club 
property and not to be kicked by strangers. But what most angered Ellis was 
the thought that Verrall quite possibly suspected him of being sorry for the 
butler-in fact, of disapproving of kicking as such. 

‘Serve him right? I dare say it bloody well did serve him right. But what in 
hell’s that got to do with it? Who are you to come kicking our servants?’ 

‘Bosh, my good chap. Needed kicking. You’ve let your servants get out of 
hand here.’ 

‘You damned, insolent young tick, what’s it got to do with you if he needed 
kicking? You’re not even a member of this Club. It’s our job to kick the 
servants, not yours.’ 

Verrall lowered the Field and brought his other eye into play. His surly voice 



Burmese Days 201 

did not change its tone. He never lost his temper with a European, it was never 
necessary. 

‘My good chap, if anyone gives me lip I kick his bottom. Do you want me to 
kick yours?’ 

All the fire went out of Ellis suddenly. He was not afraid, he had never been 
afraid in his life; only, Verrall’s eye was too much for him. That eye could 
make you feel as though you were under Niagara! The oaths wilted on Ellis’s 
lips; his voice almost deserted him. He said querulously and even plaintively: 

‘But damn it, he was quite right not to give you the last bit of ice. Do you think 
we only buy ice for you? We can only get the stuff twice a week in this place.’ 

‘Rotten bad management on your part, then,’ said Verrall, and retired 
behind the Field , content to let the matter drop. 

Ellis was helpless. The calm way in which Verrall went back to his paper, 
quite genuinely forgetting Ellis’s existence, was maddening. Should he not 
give the young swab a good, rousing kick? 

But somehow, the kick was never given. Verrall had earned many kicks m 
his life, but he had never received one and probably never would. Ellis seeped 
helplessly back to the card-room, to work off his feelings on the butler, leaving 
Verrall in possession of the lounge. 

As Mr Macgregor entered the Club gate he heard the sound of music. 
Yellow chinks of lantern-light showed through the creeper that covered the 
tennis-screen. Mr Macgregor was in a happy mood this evening. He had 
promised himself a good, long talk with Miss Lackersteen-such an 
exceptionally intelligent girl, that!-and he had a most interesting anecdote to 
tell her (as a matter of fact, it had already seen the light in one of those little 
articles of his in Blackwood’s ) about a dacoity that had happened in Sagaing in 
1913. She would love to hear it, he knew. He rounded the tennis-screen 
expectantly. On the court, in the mingled light of the waning moon and of 
lanterns slung among the trees, Verrall and Elizabeth were dancing. The 
chokras had brought out chairs and a table for the gramophone, and round 
these the other Europeans were sitting or standing. As Mr Macgregor halted at 
the corner of the court, Verrall and Elizabeth circled round and glided past 
him, barely a yard away. They were dancing very close together, her body bent 
backwards under his. Neither noticed Mr Macgregor. 

Mr Macgregor made his way round the court. A chilly, desolate feeling had 
taken possession of his entrails. Good-bye, then, to his talk with Miss 
Lackersteen! It was an effort to screw his face into its usual facetious good- 
humour as he came up to the table. 

‘A Terpsichorean evening!’ he remarked in a voice that was doleful in spite 
of himself. 

No one answered. They were all watching the pair on the tennis court. 
Utterly oblivious of the others, Elizabeth and Verrall glided round and round, 
round and round, their, shoes sliding easily on the slippery concrete. Verrall 
danced as he rode, with matchless grace. The gramophone was playing ‘Show 
Me the Way to Go Home,’ which was then going round the world like a 
pestilence and had got as far as Burma: 



202 Burmese Days 

‘Show me the way to go home, 

I’m tired an’ I wanna go to bed, 

I had a little drink ’bout an hour ago. 

An’ it’s gone right to my head’’ etc 

The dreary, depressing trash floated out among the shadowy trees and the 
streaming scents of flowers, over and over again, for Mrs Lackersteen was 
putting the gramophone needle back to the start when it neared the centre. 
The moon climbed higher, very yellow, looking, as she rose from the murk of 
dark clouds at the horizon, like a sick woman creeping out of bed. Verrall and 
Elizabeth danced on and on, indefatigably, a pale voluptuous shape in the 
gloom. They moved in perfect unison like some single animal. Mr Macgregor, 
Ellis, Westfield and Mr Lackersteen stood watching them, their hands in their 
pockets, finding nothing to say. The mosquitoes came nibbling at their ankles. 
Someone called for drinks, but the whisky was like ashes in their mouths. The 
bowels of all four older men were twisted with bitter envy. 

Verrall did not ask Mrs Lackersteen for a dance, nor, when he and Elizabeth 
finally sat down, did he take any notice of the other Europeans. He merely 
monopolized Elizabeth for half an hour more, and then, with a brief good night 
to the Lackersteens and not a word to anyone else, left the Club. The long 
dance with Verrall had left Elizabeth in a kind of dream. He had asked her to 
come out riding with him! He was going to lend her one of his ponies! She 
never even noticed that Ellis, angered by her behaviour, was doing his best to 
be openly rude. It was late when the Lackersteens got home, but there was no 
sleep yet for Elizabeth or her aunt. They were feverishly at work till midnight, 
shortening a pair of Mrs Lackersteen’s jodhpurs, and letting out the calves, to 
fit Elizabeth. 

‘I hope, dear, you can ride a horse?’ said Mrs Lackersteen. 

‘Oh, of course! I’ve ridden ever such a lot, at home.’ 

She had ridden perhaps a dozen times in all, when she was sixteen. No 
matter, she would manage somehow! She would have ridden a tiger, if Verrall 
were to accompany her. 

When at last the jodhpurs were finished and Elizabeth had tried them on, 
Mrs Lackersteen sighed to see her. She looked ravishing in jodhpurs, simply 
ravishing! And to think that in only a day or two they had got to go back to 
camp, for weeks, months perhaps, leaving Kyauktada and this most desirable 
young man! The pity of it! As they moved to go upstairs Mrs Lackersteen 
paused at the door. It had come into her head to make a great and painful 
sacrifice. She took Elizabeth by the shoulders and kissed her with a more real 
affection than she had ever shown. 

‘My dear, it would be such a shame for you to go away from Kyauktada just 
now!’ 

Tt would, rather.’ 

‘Then I’ll tell you what, dear. We won't go back to that' horrid jungle! Your 
uncle shall go alone. You and I shall stay in Kyauktada.’ 



19 


The heat was growing worse and worse. April was nearly over* but there was 
no hope of rain for another three weeks, five weeks it might be. Even the lovely 
transient dawns were spoiled by the thought of the long, blinding hours to 
come, when one’s head would ache and the glare would penetrate through 
every covering and glue up one’s eyelids with restless sleep. No one, Oriental 
or European, could keep awake in the heat of the day without a struggle; at 
night, on the other hand, with the howling dogs and the pools of sweat that 
collected and tormented one’s prickly heat, no one could sleep. The 
mosquitoes at the Club were so bad that sticks of incense had to be kept 
burning in all the corners, and the women sat with their legs in pillowslips. 
Only Verrall and Elizabeth were indifferent to the heat. They were young and 
their blood was fresh, and Verrall was too stoical and Elizabeth too happy to 
pay any attention to the climate. 

There was much bickering and scandal-mongering at the Club these days. 
Verrall had put everyone’s nose out of joint. He had taken to coming to the 
Club for -an hour or two in the evenings, but he ignored the other members, 
refused the drinks they offered him, and answered attempts at conversation 
with surly monosyllables. He would sit under the punkah in the chair that had 
once been sacred to Mrs Lackersteen, reading such of the papers as interested 
him, until Elizabeth came, when he would dance and talk with her for an hour 
or two and then make off without so much as a good-night to anybody. 
Meanwhile Mr Lackersteen was alone in his camp, and, according to the 
rumours which drifted back to Kyauktada, consoling loneliness with quite a 
miscellany of Burmese women. 

Elizabeth and Verrall went out riding together almost every evening now. 
Verrall’s mornings, after parade, were sacred to polo practice, but he had 
decided that it was worth while giving up the evenings to Elizabeth. She took 
naturally to riding, just as she had to shooting; she even had the assurance to 
tell Verrall that she had ‘hunted quite a lot’ at home. He saw at a glance that she 
was lying, but at least she did not ride so badly as to be a nuisance to him. 

They used to ride up the red road into the jungle, ford the stream by the big 
pyinkado tree covered with orchids, and then follow the narrow cart-track, 
where the dust was soft and the horses could gallop. It was stifling hot in the 
dusty jungle, and there were always mutterings of faraway, rainless thunder. 
Small martins flitted round the horses, keeping pace with them, to hawk for 
the flies their hooves turned up. Elizabeth rode the bay pony, Verrall the 



204 Burmese Days 

white. On the way home they would walk their sweat-dark horses abreast, so 
close sometimes his knee brushed against hers, and talk. Verrall could drop his 
offensive manner and talk amicably enough when he chose, and he did choose 
with Elizabeth. 

Ah, the joy of those rides together! The joy of being on horseback and in the 
world of horses-the world of hunting and racing, polo and pigsticking! If 
Elizabeth had loved Verrall for nothing else, she would have loved him for 
bringing horses into her life. She tormented him to talk about horses as once 
she had tormented Flory to talk about shooting. Verrall was no talker, it was 
true. A few gruff, jerky sentences about polo and pigsticking, and a catalogue 
of Indian stations and the names of regiments, were the best he could do. And 
yet somehow the little he said could thrill Elizabeth as all Flory’ s talk had 
never done. The mere sight of him on horseback was more evocative than any 
words. An aura of horsemanship and soldiering surrounded him. In his tanned 
face and his hard, straight body Elizabeth saw all the romance, the splendid 
panache of a cavalryman’s life. She saw the North-West Frontier and the 
Cavalry Club -she saw the polo grounds and the parched barrack yards, and 
the brown squadrons of horsemen galloping with their long lances poised and 
the trains of their pagns streaming; she heard the bugle-calls and the jingle of 
spurs, and the regimental bands playing outside the messrooms while the 
officers sat at dinner in their stiff, gorgeous uniforms. How splendid it was, 
that equestrian world, how splendid! And it was her world, she belonged to it, 
she had been born of it. These days, she lived, thought, dreamed horses, 
almost like Verrall himself. The time came when she not only told her 
taradiddle about having ‘hunted quite a lot’, she even came near believing it. 

In every possible way they got on so well together. He never bored her and 
fretted her as Flory had done. (As a matter of fact, she had almost forgotten 
Flory, these days; when she thought of him, it was for some reason always his 
birthmark that she remembered.) It was a bond between them that Verrall 
detested anything ‘highbrow’ even more than she did. He told her once that he 
had not read a book since he was eighteen, and that indeed he ‘loathed’ books; 
‘except, of course, Jorrocks and all that’. On the evening of their third or 
fourth ride they were parting at the Lackersteens’ gate. Verrall had 
successfully resisted all Mrs Lackersteen’s invitations to meals; he had not yet 
set foot inside the Lackersteens’ house, and he did not intend to do so. As the 
syce was taking Elizabeth’s pony, Verrall said: 

‘I tell you what. Next time we come out you shall ride Belinda. I’ll ride the 
chestnut. I think you’ve got on well enough not to go and cut Belinda’s mouth 
up.’ 

Belinda was the Arab mare. Verrajl had owned her two years, and till this 
moment he had never once allowed anyone else to mount her, not even the 
syce. It was the greatest favour that he could imagine. And so perfectly did 
Elizabeth appreciate Verrall’s point of view that she understood the greatness 
of the favour, and was thankful. 

The next evening, as they rode home side by side, Verrall put his arm round 
Elizabeth’s shoulder, lifted her out of the saddle and pulled her against him. 



Burmese Days 20s 

He was very strong. He dropped the bridle, and with his free hand, lifted her 
face up to meet his; their mouths met. For a moment he held her so, then 
lowered her to the ground and slipped from his horse. They stood embraced, 
their thin, drenched shirts pressed together, the two bridles held in the crook 
of his arm. 

It was about the same time that Flory, twenty miles away, decided to come 
back to Kyauktada. He was standing at the jungle’s edge by the bank of a 
dried-up stream, where he had walked to tire himself, watching some tiny, 
nameless finches eating the seeds of the tall grasses. The cocks were chrome- 
yellow, the hens like hen sparrows. Too tiny to bend the stalks, they came 
whirring towards them, seized them in midflight and bore them to the ground 
by their own weight. Flory watched the birds incuriously, and almost hated 
them because they could light no spark of interest in him. In his idleness he 
flung his dah at them, scaring them away. If she were here, if she were here 1 
Everything-birds, trees, flowers, everything-was deadly and meaningless 
because she was not here. As the days passed the knowledge that he had lost 
her had grown surer and more actual until it poisoned every moment. 

He loitered a little way into the jungle, flicking at creepers with his dah. His 
limbs felt slack and leaden. He noticed a wild vanilla plant trailing over a bush, 
and bent down to sniff at its slender, fragrant pods. The scent brought him a 
feeling of staleness and deadly ennui. Alone, alone, in the sea of life enisled! 
The pain was so great that he struck his fist against a tree, jarring his arm and 
splitting two knuckles. He must go back to Kyauktada. It was folly, for barely a 
fortnight had passed since the scene between them, and his only chance was to 
give her time to forget it. Still, he must go back. He could not stay any longer in 
this deadly place, alone with his thoughts among the endless, mindless leaves. 

A happy thought occurred to him. He could take Elizabeth the leopard-skin 
that was being cured for her in the jail It would be a pretext for seeing her, and 
when one comes bearing gifts one is generally listened to. This time he would 
not let her cut him short without a word. He would explain, extenuate-make 
her realize that she had been unjust to him. It was not right that she should 
condemn him because of Ma Hla May, whom he had turned out of doors for 
Elizabeth’s own sake. Surely she must forgive him when she heard the truth of 
the story? And this time she should hear it; he would force her to listen to him if 
he had to hold her by the arms while he did it. 

He went back the same evening. It was a twenty-mile journey, by rutted 
cart-tracks, but Flory decided to march by night, giving the reason that it was 
cooler. The servants almost mutinied at the idea of a night-march, and at the 
very last moment old Sammy collapsed in a semi-genuine fit and had to be 
plied with gin before he could start. It was a moonless night. They made their 
way by the light of lanterns, in which Flo’s eyes gleamed like emeralds and 
the bullocks’ eyes like moonstones. When the sun was up the servants 
halted to gather sticks and cook breakfast, but Flory was in a fever to be at 
Kyauktada, and he hurried ahead. He had no feeling of tiredness. The 
thought of the leopard-skin had filled him with extravagant hopes. He 
crossed the glittering river by sampan and went straight to Dr Veraswami’s 



206 Burmese Days 

bungalow, getting there about ten. 

The doctor invited him to breakfast, and- having shooed the women into 
some suitable hiding-place-took him into his own bath-room so that he could 
wash and shave. At breakfast the doctor was very excited and full of 
denunciations of ‘the crocodile’; for it appeared that the pseudo-rebellion was 
now on the point of breaking out. It was not till after breakfast that Flory had 
an opportunity to mention the leopard-skin. 

‘Oh, by the way, doctor. What about that skin I sent to the Jail to be cured? Is 
it done yet?’ 

‘Ah-’ said the doctor in a slightly disconcerted manner, rubbing his nose. 
He went inside the house-they were breakfasting on the veranda, for the 
doctor’s wife had protested violently against Flory being brought indoors-and 
came back in a moment with the skin rolled up in a bundle. 

‘Ass a matter of fact-’ he began, unrolling it. 

‘Oh, doctor!’ 

The skin had been utterly ruined. It was as stiff as cardboard, with the 
leather cracked and the fur discoloured and even rubbed off in patches. It also 
stank abominably. Instead of being cured, it had been converted into a piece of 
rubbish. 

‘Oh, doctor! What a mess they’ve made of it! How the devil did it happen?’ 
‘I am so sorry, my friend! I wass about to apologize. It wass the best we 
could do. There iss no one at the jail who knows how to cure skins now.’ 
‘But, damn it, that convict used to cure them so beautifully!’ 

‘Ah, yes. But he iss gone from us these three weeks, alas.’ 

‘Gone? I thought he was doing seven years?’ 

‘What? Did you not hear, my friend? I thought you knew who it wass that 
used to cure the skins. It was Nga Shwe O.’ 

‘Nga Shwe O?’ 

‘The dacoit who escaped with U Po Kyin’s assistance.’ 

‘Oh, hell!’ 

The mishap had daunted him dreadfully. Nevertheless, in the afternoon, 
having bathed and put on a clean suit, he went up to the Lackersteens’ house, 
at about four. It was very early to call, but he wanted to make sure of catching 
Elizabeth before she went down to the Club. Mrs Lackersteen, who had been 
asleep and was not prepared for visitors, received him with an ill grace, not 
even asking him to sit down. 

‘I’m afraid Elizabeth isn’t down yet. She’s dressing to go out riding. 
Wouldn’t it be better if you left a message?’ 

‘I’d like to see her, if you don’t mind. I’ve brought her the skin of that 
leopard we shot together.’ 

Mrs Lackersteen left him standing up in the drawing-room, feeling lumpish 
and abnormally large as one does at such times. However, she fetched 
Elizabeth, taking the opportunity of whispering to her outside the door: ‘Get 
rid of that dreadful man as soon as you can, dear. I can’t bear him about the 
house at this time of day.’ 

As Elizabeth entered the room Flory’s heart pounded so violently that a 



Burmese Days 207 

reddish mist passed behind his eyes. She was wearing a silk shirt and jodhpurs, 
and she was a little sunburned. Even in his memory she had never been so 
beautiful. He quailed; on the instant he was lost-every scrap of his screwed-up 
courage had fled. Instead of stepping forward to meet her he actually backed 
away. There was a fearful crash behind him; he had upset an occasional table 
and sent a bowl of zinnias hurtling across the floor. 

T’m so sorry!’ he exclaimed in horror. 

‘Oh, not at alll Please don’t worry about it!’ 

She helped him to pick up the table, chattering all the while as gaily and 
easily as though nothing had happened: ‘You have been away a long time, Mr 
Flory! You’re quite a strangerl We’ve so missed you at the Club!’ etc., etc. She 
was italicizing every other word, with that deadly, glittering brightness that a 
woman puts on when she is dodging a moral obligation. He was terrified of her. 
He could not even look her in the face. She took up a box of cigarettes and 
offered him one, but he refused it. His hand was shaking too much to take it. 

‘I’ve brought you that skin,’ he said flatly. 

He unrolled it on the table they had just picked up. It looked so shabby and 
miserable that he wished he had never brought it. She came close to him to 
examine the skin, so close that her flower-like cheek was not a foot from his 
own, and he could feel the warmth of her body. So great was his fear of her that 
he stepped hurriedly away. And in the same moment she too stepped back with 
a wince of disgust, having caught the foul odour of the skin. It shamed him 
terribly. It was almost as though it had been himself and not the skin that 
stank. 

‘Thank you ever so much, Mr Flory!’ She had put another yard between 
herself and the skin. ‘Such a lovely big skin, isn’t it?’ 

‘It was, but they’ve spoiled it, I’m afraid.’ 

‘Oh no! I shall love having it! -Are you back in Kyauktada for long? How 
dreadfully hot it must have been in camp!’ 

‘Yes, it’s been very hot.’ 

For three minutes they actually talked of the weather. He was helpless. All 
that he had promised himself to say, all his arguments and pleadings, had 
withered in his throat. ‘You fool, you fool,’ he thought, ‘what are you doing? 
Did you come twenty miles for this? Go on, say what you came to say! Seize 
her in your arms; make her listen, kick her, beat her-anything sooner than let 
her choke you with this drivel!’ But it was hopeless, hopeless. Not a word could 
his tongue utter except futile trivialities. How could he plead or argue, when 
that bright easy air of hers, that dragged every word to the level of Club- 
chatter silenced him before he spoke? Where do they learn it, that dreadful tee- 
heeing brightness? In these brisk modem girls’ schools, no doubt. The piece of 
carrion on the table made him more ashamed every moment. He stood there 
almost voiceless, lumpishly ugly with his face yellow and creased after the 
sleepless night, and his birthmark like a smear of dirt. 

She got rid of him after a very few minutes. ‘And now, Mr Flory, if you don’t 
mind, I ought really- 

He mumbled rather than said, ‘Won’t you come out with me again some 



208 Burmese Days 

time? Walking, shooting-something?’ 

‘I have so little time nowadays! All my evenings seem to be full. This 
evening I’m going out riding. With Mr Verrall,’ she added. 

It was possible that she added that in order to wound him. This was the first 
that he had heard of her friendship with Verrall. He could not keep the dread, 
flat tone of envy out of his voice as he said: 

‘Do you go out riding much with Verrall?’ 

‘Almost every evening. He’s such a wonderful horseman! And he has 
absolute strings of polo ponies!’ 

‘Ah. And of course I have no polo ponies.’ 

It was the first thing he had said that even approached seriousness, and it did 
no more than offend her. However, she answered him with the same gay easy 
air as before, and then showed him out. Mrs Lackersteen came back to the 
drawing-room, sniffed the air, and immediately ordered the servants to take 
the reeking leopard-skin outside and burn it. 

Flory lounged at his garden gate, pretending to feed the pigeons. He could 
not deny himself the pain of seeing Elizabeth and Verrall start on their ride. 
How vulgarly, how cruelly she had behaved to him! It is dreadful when people 
will not even have the decency to quarrel. Presently Verrall rode up to the 
Lackersteens’ house on the white pony, with a syce riding the chestnut, then 
there was a pause, then they emerged together, Verrall on the chestnut pony, 
Elizabeth on the white, and trotted quickly up the hill. They were chattering 
and laughing, her silk-shirted shoulder very close to his. Neither looked 
towards Flory. 

When they had disappeared into the jungle, Flory still loafed in the garden. 
The glare was waning to yellow. The mali was at work grubbing up the English 
flowers, most of which had died, slain by too much sunshine, and planting 
balsams, cockscombs, and more zinnias. An hour passed, and a melancholy, 
earth-coloured Indian loitered up the drive, dressed in a loin-cloth and a 
salmon-pink pagri on which a washing-basket was balanced. He laid down his 
basket and salaamed to Flory. 

‘Who are you?’ 

‘Book- wallah, sahib.’ 

The book-wallah was an itinerant peddler of books who wandered from 
station to station throughout Upper Burma. His system of exchange was that 
for any book in his bundle you gave him four annas, and any other book. Not 
quite any book, however, for the book-wallah, though analphabetic, had 
learned to recognize and refuse a Bible. 

‘No, sahib,’ he would say plaintively, ‘no. This book (he would turn it over 
disapprovingly in his flat brown hands) this book with a black cover and gold 
letters— this one I cannot take. I know not how it is, but all sahibs are offering 
me this book, and none are taking it. What can it be that is in this black book? 
Some evil, undoubtedly.’ 

‘Turn out your trash,’ Flory said. 

He hunted among them for a good thriller-Edgar Wallace or Agatha 
Christie or something; anything to still the deadly restlessness that was at his 



Burmese Days 209 

heart. As he bent over the books he saw that both Indians were exclaiming and 
pointing towards the edge of the jungle. 

‘Dekko!’ said the mali m his plum-in-the-mouth voice. 

The two ponies were emerging from the jungle. But they were riderless. 
They came trotting down the hill with the silly guilty air of a horse that has 
escaped from its master, with the stirrups swinging and clashing under their 
bellies. 

Flory remained unconsciously clasping one of the books against his chest. 
Verrall and Elizabeth had dismounted. It was not an accident; by no effort of 
the mind could one imagine Verrall falling off his horse. They had 
dismounted, and the ponies had escaped. 

They had dismounted-for what? Ah, but he knew for what! It was not a 
question of suspecting; he knew. He could see the whole thing happening, in 
one of those hallucinations that are so perfect in detail, so vilely obscene, that 
they are past bearing. He threw the book violently down and made for the 
house, leaving the book-wallah disappointed. The servants heard him moving 
about indoors, and presently he called for a bottle of whisky. He had a drink 
and it did him no good. Then he filled a tumbler two-thirds full, added enough 
water to make it drinkable, and swallowed it. The filthy, nauseous dose was no 
sooner down his throat than he repeated it. He had done the same thing in 
camp once, years ago, when he was tortured by toothache and three hundred 
miles from a dentist. At seven Ko S’ la came in as usual to say that the bath- 
water was hot. Flory was lying in one of the long chairs, with his coat off and 
his shirt torn open at the throat. 

‘Your bath, thakm / said Ko S’la. 

Flory did not answer, and Ko S’la touched his arm, thinking him asleep 
Flory was much too drunk to move. The empty bottle had rolled across the 
floor, leaving a trail of whisky-drops behind it. Ko S’la called for Ba Pe and 
picked up the bottle, clicking his tongue. 

‘Just look at this! He has drunk more than three-quarters of a bottle!’ 

‘What, again? I thought he had given up drinking?’ 

‘It is that accursed woman, I suppose. Now we must carry him carefully. 
You take his heels, I’ll take his head. That’s right. Hoist him up!’ 

They carried Flory into the other room and laid him gently on the bed. 

‘Is he really going to marry this “Ingaleikma”?’ said Ba Pe. 

‘Heaven knows. She is the mistress of the young police officer at present, so I 
was told. Their ways are not our ways. I think I know what he will be wanting 
tonight,’ he added as he undid Flory’s braces— for Ko S’la had the art, so 
necessary in a bachelor’s servant, of undressing his master without waking 
him. 

The servants were rather pleased than not to see this return to bachelor 
habits. Flory woke about midnight, naked in a pool of sweat. His head felt as 
though some large, sharp-cornered metal object were bumping about inside it. 
The mosquito net was up, and a young woman was sitting beside the bed 
fanning him with a wicker fan. She had an agreeable negroid face, bronze-gold 
in the candlelight. She explained that she was a prostitute, and that Ko S’la 



210 Burmese Days 

had engaged her on his own responsibility for a fee of ten rupees. 

Flory’s head was splitting. ‘For God’s sake get me something to drink,’ he 
said feebly to the woman. She brought him some soda-water which Ko S’la 
had cooled in readiness and soaked a towel and put a wet compress round his 
forehead. She was a fat, good-tempered creature. She told him that her name 
was Ma Sein Galay, and that besides plying her other trade she sold paddy 
baskets in the bazaar near Li Yeik’s shop. Flory’s head felt better presently, 
and he asked for a cigarette; whereupon Ma Sein Galay, having fetched the 
cigarette, said naively, ‘Shall I take my clothes off now, thakinV 

Why not? he thought dimly. He made room for her in the bed. But when he 
smelled the familiar scent of garlic and coco-nut oil, something painful 
happened within him, and with his head pillowed on Ma Sein Galay’ s fat 
shoulder he actually wept, a thing he had not done since he was fifteen years 
old. 


20 


Next morning there was great excitement in Kyauktada, for the long- 
rumoured rebellion had at last broken out. Flory heard only a vague report of it 
at the time. He had gone back to camp as soon as he felt fit to march after the 
drunken night, and it was not until several days later that he learned the true 
history of the rebellion, in a long, indignant letter from Dr Veraswami. 

The doctor’s epistolary style was queer. His syntax was shaky and he was as 
free with capital letters as a seventeenth-century divine, while in the use of 
italics he rivalled Queen Victoria. There were eight pages of his small but 
sprawling handwriting. 

Mv DEAR FRIEND [the letter ran],- You will much regret to hear that the wiles of the crocodile have 
matured. The rebellion-the so-called rebellion-is all over and finished. And it has been, alas! a 
more Bloody affair than I had hoped should have been the case 

All has fallen out as I have prophesied to you it would be. On the day when you came back to 
Kyauktada U Po Kym’s spies have informed him that the poor unfortunate men whom he have 
Deluded are assembling in the jungle near Thongwa. The same night he sets out secretly with U 
Lugale, the Police Inspector, who is as great a Rogue as he, if that could be, and twelve constables. 
They make a swift raid upon Thongwa and surprise the rebels, of whom they are only Seven!* in a 
ruined field hut in the jungle. Also Mr Maxwell, who have heard rumours of the rebellion, came 
across from his camp bringing his Rifle and was in time to jom U Po Kym and the police in their 
attack on the hut The next morning the clerk Ba Sein, who is U Po Kym’s jackall and dirty worker, 
have orders to raise the cry of rebellion as Sensationally as possible, which was done, and Mr 
Macgregor, Mr Westfield and Lieutenant Verrall all rush out to Thongwa carrying fifty sepoys 
armed with rifles besides Civil Police. But they arrive to find it is all over and U Po Kyin was sitting 
under a big teak tree in the middle of the village and putting on airs and lecturing the villages, 
whereat they are all bowing very frightened and touching the ground with their foreheads and 
swearing they will be forever loyal to the Government, and the rebellion is already at an end The 



Burmese Days 21 1 

so-called weiksa, who is no other than a circus conjurer and the minion of U Po Kym, have vanished 
for parts unknown, but six rebels have been Caught So there is an end 

Also I should inform you that there was most regrettably a Death Mr Maxwell was I think too 
anxious to use his Rifle and when one of the rebels try to run away he fired and shoot him in the 
abdomen, at which he died I think the villagers have some bad feeling towards Mr Maxwell 
because of it. But from the point of view legal all is well for Mr Maxwell, because the men were 
undoubtedly conspiring against the Government 

Ah, but, my Friend, I trust that you understand how disastrous may all this be for me 1 You will 
realise, I think, what is its bearing upon the Contest between U Po Kyin and myself, and the 
supreme leg-up it must give to him It is the triumph of the crocodile U Po Kym is now the Hero of 
the district He is the pet of the Europeans I am told that even Mr Ellis has praised his conduct If 
you could witness the abominable Conceitedness and the lies he is now telling as to how there were 
not seven rebels but Two Hundred'! and how he crushed upon them revolver m hand-he who 
only directing operations from a safe distance while the police and Mr Maxwell creep up upon the 
hut-you would find it veritably Nauseous I assure you. He has had the effrontery to send m an 
official report of the matter which started, ‘By my loyal promptitude and reckless daring’, and I 
hear that positively he had had this Conglomeration of lies written out in readiness days before the 
occurrence It is Disgusting And to think that now when he is at the Height of his triumph he will 
again begin to calumniate me with all the venom at his disposal etc , etc. 

The rebels’ entire stock of weapons had been captured. The armoury with 
which, when their followers were assembled, they had proposed to march 
upon Kyauktada, consisted of the following: 

Item, one shotgun with a damaged left barrel, stolen from a Forest Officer 
three years earlier. 

Item, six home-made guns with barrels of zmc piping stolen from the 
railway. These could be fired, after a fashion, by thrusting a nail through the 
touch-hole and striking it with a stone. 

Item, thirty-nine twelve-bore cartridges. 

Item, eleven dummy guns carved out of teakwood. 

Item, some large Chinese crackers which were to have been fired in terrorem. 

Later, two of the rebels were sentenced to fifteen years 1 transportation, three 
to three years’ imprisonment and twenty-five lashes, and one to two years’ 
imprisonment. 

The whole miserable rebellion was so obviously at an end that the 
Europeans were not considered to be in any danger, and Maxwell had gone 
back to his camp unguarded. Flory intended to stay in camp until the rains 
broke, or at least until the general meeting at the Club. He had promised to be 
in for that, to propose the doctor’s election; though now, with his own trouble 
to think of, the whole business of the intrigue between U Po Kyin and the 
doctor sickened him. 

More weeks crawled by. The heat was dreadful now. The overdue rain 
seemed to have bred a fever in the air. Flory was out of health, and worked 
incessantly, worrying over petty jobs that should have been left to the overseer, 
and making the coolies and even the servants hate him. He drank gin at all 
hours, but not even drinking could distract him now. The vision of Elizabeth 
in Verrall’s arms haunted him like a neuralgia or an earache. At any moment it 
would come upon him, vivid and disgusting, scattering his thoughts, 
wrenching him back from the brink of sleep, turning his food to dust in his 
mouth. At times he flew into savage rages, and once even struck Ko S’ia. What 



212 Burmese Days 

was worse than all was the detail - the always filthy detail-in which the 
imagined scene appeared The very perfection of the detail seemed to prove 
that it was true 

Is there anything in the world more graceless, more dishonouring, than to 
desire a woman whom you will never have? Throughout all these weeks 
Flory’s mind held hardly a thought which was not murderous or obscene It is 
the common effect of jealousy Once he had loved Elizabeth spiritually, 
sentimentally indeed, desiring her sympathy more than her caresses, now, 
when he had lost her, he was tormented by the basest physical longing He did 
not even idealize her any longer He saw her now almost as she was-silly, 
snobbish, heartless-and it made no difference to his longing for her Does it 
ever make any difference? At nights when he lay awake, his bed dragged 
outside the tent for coolness, looking at the velvet dark from which the barking 
of a gyi sometimes sounded, he hated himself for the images that inhabited his 
mind It was so base, this envying of the better man who had beaten him For it 
was only envy-even jealousy was too good a name for it What right had he to 
be jealous? He had offered himself to a girl who was too young and pretty for 
him, and she had turned him down-rightly He had got the snub he deserved 
Nor was there any appeal from that decision, nothing would ever make him 
young again, or take away his birthmark and his decade of lonely debaucheries 
He could only stand and look on while the better man took her, and envy him, 
like-but the simile was not even mentionable Envy is a horrible thing It is 
unlike all other kinds of suffering in that there is no disguising it, no elevating it 
into tragedy It is more than merely painful, it is disgusting 

But meanwhile, was it true, what he suspected? Had Verrall really become 
Elizabeth’s lover? There is no knowing, but on the whole the chances were 
against it, for, had it been so, there would have been no concealing it m such a 
place as Kyauktada Mrs Lackersteen would probably have guessed it, even if 
the others had not One thing was certain, however, and that was that Verrall 
had as yet made no proposal of marriage A week went by, two weeks, three 
weeks, three weeks is a very long time in a small Indian station Verrall and 
Elizabeth rode together every evening, danced together every night, yet 
Verrall had never so much as entered the Lackersteens’ house There was 
endless scandal about Elizabeth, of course All the Orientals of the town had 
taken it for granted that she was Verrall’ s mistress, U Po Kym’s version (he 
had a way of being essentially right even when he was wrong m detail) was that 
Elizabeth had been Flory’s concubine and had deserted him for Verrall 
because Verrall paid her more Ellis, too, was inventing tales about Elizabeth 
that made Mr Macgregor squirm Mrs Lackersteen, as a relative, did not hear 
these scandals, but she was growing nervous Every evening when Elizabeth 
came home from her ride she would meet her hopefully, expecting the ‘Oh, 
aunt* What do you think 1 ’-and then the glorious news But the news never 
came, and however carefully she studied Elizabeth’s face, she could divine 
nothing. 

When three weeks had passed Mrs Lackersteen became fretful and finally 
half angry The thought of her husband, alone-or rather, not alone-m his 



Burmese Days 21s 

camp, was troubling her After all, she had sent him back to camp in order to 
give Elizabeth her chance with Verrall (not that Mrs Lacker steen would have 
put it so vulgarly as that) One evening she began lecturing and threatening 
Elizabeth in her oblique way The conversation consisted of a sighing 
monologue with very long pauses-for Elizabeth made no answer whatever 
Mrs Lackersteen began with some general remarks, apropos of a 
photograph m the Tatler, about these fast modern girls who went about in 
beach pyjamas and all that and made themselves so dreadfully cheap with men 
A girl, Mrs Lackersteen said, should never make herself too cheap with a man, 
she should make herself-but the opposite of ‘cheap’ seemed to be ‘expensive’, 
and that did not sound at all right, so Mrs Lackersteen changed her tack She 
went on to tell Elizabeth about a letter she had had from home with further 
news of that poor, poor dear girl who was out in Burma for a while and had so 
foolishly neglected to get married Her sufferings had been quite heartrending, 
and it just showed how glad a girl ought to be to marry anyone, literally anyone 
It appeared that the poor, poor dear girl had lost her job and been practically 
starving for a long time, and now she had actually had to take a job as a common 
kitchen maid under a horrid, vulgar cook who bullied her most shockingly 
And it seemed that the black beetles m the kitchen were simply beyond belief 1 
Didn’t Elizabeth think it too absolutely dreadfuP Black beetles' 

Mrs Lackersteen remained silent fc?r some time, to allow the black beetles to 
sink m, before adding 

'Such a pity that Mr Verrall will be leaving us when the rams break 
Kyauktada will seem quite empty without him 1 ’ 

‘When do the rams break, usually 5 ’ said Elizabeth as indifferently as she 
could manage 

‘About the beginmng of June, up here Only a week or two now My 
dear, it seems absurd to mention it again, but I cannot get out of my head the 
thought of that poor, poor dear girl in the kitchen among the black beetles 
Black beetles recurred more than once in Mrs Lackersteen’s conversation 
during the rest of the evening It was not until the following day that she 
remarked m the tone of someone dropping an unimportant piece of gossip 
‘By the way, I believe Flory is coming back to Kyauktada at the beginning of 
June He said he was gomg to be m for the general meeting at the Club 
Perhaps we might invite him to dinner some time ’ 

It was the first time that either of them had mentioned Flory since the day 
when he had brought Elizabeth the leopard-skm After being virtually 
forgotten for several weeks, he had returned to each woman’s mind, a 
depressing pis aller 

Three days later Mrs Lackersteen sent word to her husband to come back to 
Kyauktada He had been m camp long enough to earn a short spell in 
headquarters He came back, more florid than ever- sunburn, he 
explamed-and having acquired such a trembling of the hands that he could 
barely light a cigarette Nevertheless, that evening he celebrated his return by 
manoeuvring Mrs Lackersteen out of the house, coming into Elizabeth’s 
bedroom and making a spirited attempt to rape her 



214 Burmese Days 

During all this time, unknown to anyone of importance, further sedition was 
afoot The ‘weiksa’ (now far away, peddling the philosopher’s stone to 
1 innocent villagers in Martaban) had perhaps done his job a little better than he 
intended At any rate, there was a possibility of fresh trouble-some isolated, 
futile outrage, probably Even U Po Kym knew nothing of this yet But as 
usual the gods were fighting on his side, for any further rebellion would make 
the first seem more serious than it had been, and so add to his glory 


21 


O western wind, when wilt thou blow, that the small ram down can ram? It was 
the first of June, the day of the general meeting, and there had not been a drop 
of ram yet As Flory came up the Club path the sun of afternoon, slanting 
beneath his hat-brim, was still savage enough to scorch his neck 
uncomfortably The mail staggered along the path, his breast-muscles slippery 
with sweat, carrying two kerosene-tins of water on a yoke He dumped them 
down, slopping a little water over his lank brown feet, and salaamed to Flory 

‘Well, mail , is the ram coming?’ 

The man gestured vaguely towards the west ‘The hills have captured it, 
sahib 5 

Kyauktada was ringed almost round by hills, and these caught the earlier 
showers, so that sometimes no ram fell till amost the end of June The earth of 
the flower-beds, hoed into large untidy lumps, looked grey and hard as 
concrete Flory went into the lounge and found Westfield loafing by the 
veranda, looking out over the river, for the chicks had been rolled up At the 
foot of the veranda a chokra lay on his back in the sun, pulling the punkah rope 
with his heel and shading his face with a broad strip of banana leaf 

‘Hullo, Flory* You’ve got thm as a rake ’ 

‘So’ve you ’ 

‘H’m, yes Bloody weather No appetite except for booze Christ, won’t I be 
glad when I hear the frogs start croaking Let’s have a spot before the others 
come Butler*’ 

‘Do you know who’s coming to the meeting?’ Flory said, when the butler 
had brought whisky and tepid soda 

‘Whole crowd, I believe Lackersteen got back from camp three days ago By 
God, that man’s been having the time of his life away from his missus* My 
inspector was telling me about the gomgs-on at his camp Tarts by the score 
Must have imported ’em specially from Kyauktada He’ll catch it all right 
when the old woman sees his Club bill Eleven bottles of whisky sent out to his 
camp in a fortnight ’ 

‘Is young Verrall coming?’ 



Burmese Days 215 

‘No, he’s only a temporary member Not that he’d trouble to come anyway, 
young tick Maxwell won’t be here either Can’t leave camp just yet, he says 
He sent word Ellis was to speak for him if there’s any voting to be done Don’t 
suppose there’ll be anything to vote about, though eh?’ he added, looking at 
Flory obliquely, for both of them remembered their previous quarrel on this 
subject 

4 1 suppose it lies with Macgregor ’ 

‘What I mean is*, Macgregor’ll have dropped that bloody rot about electing a 
native member, eh? Not the moment for it just now After the rebellion and all 
that ’ 

‘What about the rebellion, by the way 2’ said Flory He did not want to start 
wrangling about the doctor’s election yet There was going to be trouble and to 
spare m a few minutes ‘Any more news -are they going to have another try, do 
you think?’ 

‘No All over. I’m afraid They caved in like the funks they are The whole 
district’s as quiet as a bloody girls’ school Most disappointing ’ 

Flory’s heart missed a beat He had heard Elizabeth’s voice mthe next room 
Mr Macgregor came in at this moment, Ellis and Mr Lackersteen following 
This made up the full quota, for the women members of the Club had no votes 
Mr Macgregor was already dressed in a silk suit, and was carrying the Club 
account books under his arm He managed to bring a sub-official air even into 
such petty business as a Club meeting 

‘As we seem to be all here,’ he said after the usual greetings, ‘shall 
we-ah-proceed with our labours?’ 

‘Lead on, Macduff,’ said Westfield, sitting down 

‘Call the butler, someone, for Christ’s sake,’ said Mr Lackersteen ‘I daren’t 
let my missus hear me calling him ’ 

‘Before we apply ourselves to the agenda,’ said Mr Macgregor when he had 
refused a drink and the others had taken one, ‘I expect you will want me to run 
through the accounts for the half-year?’ 

They did not want it particularly, but Mr Macgregor, who enjoyed this kind 
of thing, ran through the accounts with great thoroughness Flory’s thoughts 
were wandering There was going to be such a row m a moment-oh, such a 
devil of a row! They would be furious when they found that he was proposing 
the doctor after all And Elizabeth was in the next room God send she didn’t 
hear the noise of the row when it came It would make her despise him all the 
more to see the others baiting him Would he see her this evening? Would she 
speak to him? He gazed across the quarter-mile of gleaming river By the far 
bank a knot of men, one of them wearing a green gaungbaung , were waiting 
beside a sampan In the channel, by the nearer bank, a huge, clumsy Indian 
barge struggled with desperate slowness against the racing current At each 
stroke the ten rowers, Dravidian starvelings, ran forward and plunged their 
long primitive oars, with heart-shaped blades, into the water They braced 
their meagre bodies, then tugged, writhed, strained backwards like agonized 
creatures of black rubber, and the ponderous hull crept onwards a yard or two 
Then the rowers sprang foward, panting, to plunge their oars agam before the 



216 


Burmese Days 


current should check her 

‘And now,’ said Mr Macgregor more gravely, ‘we come to the main point of 
the agenda That, of course, is this-ah-distasteful question, which I am afraid 
must be faced, of electing a native member to this Club When we discussed 
the matter before-’ 

‘What the hell ' 5 

It was Ellis who had interrupted He was so excited that he had sprung to his 
feet 

‘What the hell 1 Surely we aren’t starting that over again? Talk about electing 
a damned nigger to this Club, after everything that’s happened 1 Good God, I 
thought even Flory had dropped it by this time 1 ’ 

‘Our friend Ellis appears surprised The matter has been discussed before, I 
believe ’ 

‘I should think it damned well was discussed before* And we all said what we 
thought of it By God-’ 

‘If our friend Ellis will sit down for a few moments-’ said Mr Macgregor 
tolerantly 

Ellis threw himself into his chair again, exclaiming, ‘Bloody rubbish*’ 
Beyond the river Flory could see the group of Burmans embarking They were 
lifting a long, awkward-shaped bundle into the sampan Mr Macregor had 
produced a letter from his file of papers 

‘Perhaps I had better explain how this question arose in the first place The 
Commissioner tells me that a circular has been sent round by the Government, 
suggesting that in those Clubs where there are no native members, one at least 
shall be co-opted, that is, admitted automatically The circular says-ah yes' 
here it is “It is mistaken policy to offer social affronts to native officials of high 
standing ” I may say that I disagree most emphatically No doubt we all do 
We who have to do the actual work of government see things very differently 
from these-ah-Paget M P s who interfere with us from above The 
Commissioner quite agrees with me However-’ 

‘But it’s all bloody rot*’ broke in Ellis, ‘What’s it got to do with the 
Commissioner or anyone else? Surely we can do as we like in our own bloody 
Club? They’ve no right to dictate to us when we’re off duty ’ 

‘Quite,’ said Westfield 

‘You anticipate me I told the Commissioner that I should have to put the 
matter before the other members And the course he suggests is this If the idea 
finds any support m the Club, he thinks it would be better if we co-opted our 
native member On the other hand, if the entire Club is against it, it can be 
dropped That is, if opinion is quite unanimous ’ 

‘Well, it damned well is unanimous,’ said Ellis 

‘D’you mean,’ said Westfield, ‘that it depends on ourselves whether we have 
’em in here or no?’ 

‘I fancy we can take it as meaning that ’ 

‘Well, then, let’s say we’re against it to a man ’ 

‘And say it bloody firmly, by God We want to put our foot down on this idea 
once and for all ’ 



Burmese Days 217 

‘Hear, hear 1 ’ said Mr Lackersteen gruffly ‘Keep the black swabs out of it 
Esprit de corps and all that.’ 

Mr Lackersteen could always be relied upon for sound sentiments in a case 
like this In his heart he did not care and never had cared a damn for the British 
Raj, and he was as happy drinking with an Oriental as with a white man, but he 
was always ready with a loud ‘Hear, hear 1 ’ when anyone suggested the bamboo 
for disrespectful servants or boiling oil for Nationalists He prided himself that 
though he might booze a bit and all that, dammit, he was loyal It was his form 
of respectability Mr Macgregor was secretly rather relieved by the general 
agreement If any Oriental member were co-opted, that member would have to 
be Dr Veraswami, and he had had the deepest distrust of the doctor ever since 
Nga Shwe O’s suspicious escape from the jail 

‘Then I take it that you are all agreed?’ he said ‘If so, I will inform the 
Commissioner Otherwise, we must begin discussing the candidate for 
election * 

Flory stood up He had got to say his say His heart seemed to have risen into 
his throat and to be choking him From what Mr Macgregor had said, it was 
clear that it was in his power to secure the doctor’s election by speaking the 
word But oh, what a bore, what a nuisance it was 1 What an infernal uproar 
there would be 1 How he wished he had never given the doctor that promise 1 
No matter, he had given it, and he could not break it So short a time ago he 
would have broken it, en bon pukka sahib , how easily 1 But not now He had got 
to see this thing through He turned himself sidelong so that his birthmark was 
away from the others Already he could feel his voice going flat and guilty 
‘Our friend Flory has something to suggest?’ 

‘Yes I propose Dr Veraswami as a member of this Club ’ 

There was such a yell of dismay from three of the others that Mr Macgregor 
had to rap sharply on the table and remind them that the ladies were m the next 
room Ellis took not the smallest notice He had sprung to his feet again, and 
the skm round his nose had gone quite grey He and Flory remained facing one 
another, as though on the point of blows 

‘Now, you damned swab, will you take that back?’ 

‘No, I will not ’ 

‘You oily swine 1 You nigger’s Nancy Boy 1 You crawling, sneakmg,-bloody 
bastard 1 ’ 

‘Order!’ exclaimed Mr Macgregor 

‘But look at him, look at him 1 ’ cried Ellis almost tearfully- ‘Letting us all 
down for the sake of a pot-bellied nigger 1 After ail we’ve said to him 1 When 
we’ve only got to hang together and we can keep the stink of garlic out of this 
Club for ever My God, wouldn’t it make you spew your guts up to see anyone 
behaving like such a-?’ 

‘Take it back, Flory, old man 1 ’ said Westfield 'Don’t be a bloody fool 1 ’ 
‘Downright Bolshevism, dammit 1 ’ said Mr Lackersteen 
‘Do you think I care what you say? What business is it of yours? It’s for 
Macgregor to decide ’ 

‘Then do you-ah~adhere to your decision?’ said Mr Macgregor gloomily 



218 


Burmese Days 


‘Yes ’ 

Mr Macgregor sighed ‘A pity 1 Well, m that case I suppose I have no 
choice-’ 

‘No, no, no 1 ’ cried Ellis, dancing about in his rage ‘Don’t give in to him' Put 
it to the vote And if that son of a bitch doesn’t put in a black ball like the rest of 
us, we’ll first turf him out of the Club himself, and then- well’ Butler' ’ 
‘Sahib 1 ’ said the butler, appearing 

‘Bring the ballot box and the balls Now clear out 1 ’ he added roughly when 
the butler had obeyed 

The air had gone very stagnant, for some reason the punkah had stopped 
working Mr Macgregor stood up with a disapproving but judicial mien, 
taking the two drawers of black and white balls out of the ballot box 

‘We must proceed in order Mr Flory proposes Dr Veraswami, the Civil 
Surgeon, as a member of this Club Mistaken, in my opinion, greatly mistaken, 
however-' Before putting the matter to the vote-’ 

‘Oh, why make a song and dance about it >5 said Ellis ‘Here’s my 
contribution' And another for Maxwell ’ He plumped two black balls into the 
box Then one of his sudden spasms of rage seized him, and he took the drawer 
of white balls and pitched them across the floor They went flying in all 
directions ‘There' Now pick one up if you want to use it'’ 

‘You damned fool' What good do you think that does^’ 

‘Sahib' 5 

They all started and looked round The chokra was goggling at them over 
the veranda rail, having climbed up from below With one skmny arm he clung 
to the rail and with the other gesticulated towards the river 
‘Sahib' Sahib'’ 

‘What’s up^’ said Westfield, 

They all moved for the window The sampan that Flory had seen across the 
river was lying under the bank at the foot of the lawn, one of the men clinging 
to a bush to steady it The Burman m the green gaungbaung was climbing out 
‘That’s one of Maxwell’s Forest Rangers' 5 said Ellis in quite a different 
voice ‘By God' something’s happened 1 ’ 

The Forest Ranger saw Mr Macgregor, shikoed in a hurried, preoccupied 
way and turned back to the sampan Four other men, peasants, climbed out 
after him, and with difficulty lifted ashore the strange bundle that Flory had 
seen in the distance It was six feet long, swathed m cloths, like a mummy 
Something happened in everybody’s entrails The Forest Ranger glanced at 
the veranda, saw that there was no way up, and led the peasants round the path 
to the front of the Club They had hoisted the bundle on to their shoulders as 
funeral bearers hoist a coffin. The butler had flitted into the lounge again, and 
even his face was pale after its fashion-that is, grey 
‘Butler'’ said Mr Macgregor sharply 
‘Sir' 5 

‘Go quickly and shut the door of the card-room Keep it shut Don’t let the 
memsahibs see ’ 

‘Yes, sir'’ 



Burmese Days 219 

The Burmans, with their burden, came heavily down the passage As they 
entered the leading man staggered and almost fell, he had trodden on one of the 
white balls that were scattered about the floor The Burmans knelt down, 
lowered their burden to the floor and stood over it with a strange reverent air, 
slightly bowing, their hands together in a shiko Westfield had fallen on his 
knees, and he pulled back the cloth 

‘Christ 1 Just look at him 1 ’ he said, but without much surprise ‘Just look at 
the poor little b — >’ 

Mr Lackersteen had retreated to the other end of the room, with a bleating 
noise From the moment when the bundle was lifted ashore they had all known 
what it contained It was the body of Maxwell, cut almost to pieces with dahs 
by two relatives of the man whom he had shot 


22 


Maxwell’s death had caused a profound shock m Kyauktada It would cause a 
shock throughout the whole of Burma, and the case-‘the Kyauktada case, do 
you remember?’-would still be talked of years after the wretched youth’s 
name was forgotten But in a purely personal way no one was much distressed 
Maxwell had been almost a nonentity-just a ‘good fellow’ like any other of the 
ten thousand ex colore good fellows of Burma-and with no close friends No 
one among the Europeans genuinely mourned for him But that is not to say 
that they were not angry On the contrary, for the moment they were almost 
mad with rage For the unforgivable had happened-a white man had been 
killed When that happens, a sort of shudder runs through the English of the 
East Eight hundred people, possibly, are murdered every year m Burma, they 
matter nothing, but the murder of a white man is a monstrosity, a sacrilege 
Poor Maxwell would be avenged, that was certain But only a servant or two, 
and the Forest Ranger who had brought in his body and who had been fond of 
him, shed any tears for his death 

On the other hand, no one was actually pleased, except U Po Kym 
‘This is a positive gift from heaven 1 ’ he told Ma Km ‘I could not have 
arranged it better myself. The one thing I needed to make them take my 
rebellion seriously was a little bloodshed And here it is 1 I tell you, Ma Km, 
every day I grow more certain that some higher power is working on my 
behalf’ 

‘Ko Po Kym, truly you are without shame* I do not know how you dare to 
say such things Do you not shudder to have murder upon your souP’ 

‘What* P Murder upon my souP What are you talking about? I have never 
killed so much as a chicken in my life.’ 

‘But you are profiting by this poor boy’s death ’ 



220 Burmese Days 

‘Profiting by it 1 Ot course I am profiting by it' And why not, indeed? Am I to 
blame if somebody else choose to commit murder? The fisherman catches fish, 
and he is damned for it But are we damned for eating the fish? Certainly not 
Why not eat the fish, once it is dead? You should study the Scriptures more 
carefully, my dear Kin Km ’ 

The funeral took place next morning, before breakfast All the Europeans 
were present, except Verrall, who was careering about the maidan quite as 
usual, almost opposite the cemetery Mr Macgregor read the burial service 
The little group of Englishmen stood round the grave, their topis m their 
hands, sweating into the dark suits that they had dug out from the bottom of 
their boxes The harsh morning light beat without mercy upon their faces, 
yellower than ever against the ugly, shabby clothes Every face except 
Elizabeth’s looked lined and old Dr Veraswami and half a dozen other 
Orientals were present, but they kept themselves decently in the background 
There were sixteen gravestones in the little cemetery, assistants of timber 
firms, officials, soldiers killed in forgotten skirmishes 

‘Sacred to the memory of John Henry Spagnall, late of the Indian Imperial 
Police, who was cut down by cholera while in the unremitting exercise of’ etc , 
etc , etc 

Flory remembered Spagnall dimly He had died very suddenly in camp after 
his second go of delirium tremens In a corner there were some graves of 
Eurasians, with wooden crosses The creeping jasmine, with tmy orange- 
hearted flowers, had overgrown everything Among the jasmine, large rat- 
holes led down into the graves 

Mr Macgregor concluded the burial service in a ripe, reverent voice, and led 
the way out of the cemetery, holding his grey topi-the Eastern equivalent of a 
top hat-agamst his stomach Flory lingered by the gate, hoping that Elizabeth 
would speak to him, but she passed him without a glance Everyone had 
shunned him this morning He was in disgrace, the murder had made his 
disloyalty of last night seem somehow horrible Ellis had caught Westfield by 
the arm, and they halted at the grave-side, taking out their cigarette-cases 
Flory could hear their slangy voices coming across the open grave 

‘My God, Westfield, my God, when I think of that poor little b — lying 
down there-oh, my God, how my blood does boil' I couldn’t sleep all night, I 
was so furious ’ 

‘Pretty bloody, I grant Never mind, promise you a couple of chaps shall 
swing for it Two corpses against their one-best we can do ’ 

‘Two 1 It ought to be fifty 1 We’ve got to raise heaven and hell to get these 
fellows hanged Have you got their names yet?’ 

‘Yes, rather'! Whole blooming district knows who did it We always do 
know who’s done it in these cases Getting the bloody villagers to talk-that’s 
the only trouble 5 

‘Well, for God’s sake get them to talk this time Never mmd the bloody law 
Whack it out of them Torture them-any thing If you want to bribe any 
witnesses, I’m good for a couple of hundred chips ’ 

Westfield sighed ‘Can’t do that sort of thing. I’m afraid Wish we could My 



Burmese Days 221 

chaps’d know how to put the screw on a witness if you gave ’em the word Tie 
’em down on an ant-hill Red peppers But that won’t do nowadays Got to 
keep our own bloody silly laws But never mmd, those fellows’ll swing all 
right We’ve got all the evidence we want ’ 

‘Good 1 And when you’ve arrested them, if you aren’t sure of getting a 
conviction, shoot them, jolly well shoot them 1 Fake up an escape or something 
Anything sooner than let those b — s go free ’ 

‘They won’t go free, don’t you fear We’ll get ’em Get somebody , anyhow 
Much better hang wrong fellow than no fellow,’ he added, unconsciously 
quoting 

‘That’s the stuff 1 I’ll never sleep easy again till I’ve seen them swinging,’ 
said Ellis as they moved away from the grave ‘Christ 1 Let’s get out of this sun' 
I’m about perishing with thirst ’ 

Everyone was perishing, more or less, but it seemed hardly decent to go 
down to the Club for drinks immediately after the funeral The Europeans 
scattered for their houses, while four sweepers with mamooties flung the grey, 
cement-like earth back into the grave, and shaped it into a rough mound 
After breakfast, Ellis was walking down to his office, cane m hand It was 
blinding hot Ellis had bathed and changed back into shirt and shorts, but 
wearing a thick suit even for an hour had brought on his prickly heat 
abominably Westfield had gone out already, in his motor launch, with an 
Inspector and half a dozen men, to arrest the murderers He had ordered 
Verrall to accompany him-not that Verrall was needed, but, as Westfield said, 
it would do the young swab good to have a spot of work 

Ellis wriggled his shoulders-his prickly heat was almost beyond bearing 
The rage was stewing in his body like a bitter juice He had brooded all night 
over what had happened They had killed a white man, killed a white man , the 
bloody sods, the sneaking, cowardly hounds' Oh, the swine, the swine, how 
they ought to be made to suffer for it 1 Why did we make these cursed kid-glove 
laws? Why did we take everything lying down? Just suppose this had happened 
in a German colony, before the War 1 The good old Germans 1 They knew how 
to treat the niggers Reprisals 1 Rhinoceros hide whips 1 Raid their villages, kill 
their cattle, burn their crops, decimate them, blow them from the guns 
Ellis gazed into the horrible cascades of light that poured through the gaps m 
the trees His greenish eyes were large and mournful A mild, middle-aged 
Burman came by, balancing a huge bamboo, which he shifted from one 
shoulder to the other with a grunt as he passed Ellis Ellis’s grip tightened on 
his stick If that swine, now, would only attack you 1 Or even insult 
you-anythmg, so that you had the right to smash him 1 If only these gutless 
curs would ever show fight in any conceivable way 1 Instead of just sneaking 
past you, keeping within the law so that you never had a chance go get back on 
them Ah, for a real rebellion-martial law proclaimed and no quarter given 1 
Lovely, sanguinary images moved through his mind. Shrieking mounds of 
natives, soldiers slaughtering them Shoot them, ride them down, horses’ 
hooves trample their guts out, whips cut their faces in slices 1 
Five High School boys came down the road abreast Ellis saw them coming, 



222 Burmese Days 

a row of yellow, malicious faces-epicene faces, horribly smooth and young, 
grinning at him with deliberate insolence It was in their minds to bait him, as a 
white man Probably they had heard of the murder, and-bemg Nationalists, 
like all schoolboys-regarded it as a victory They grinned full in Ellis’s face as 
they passed him They were trying openly to provoke him, and they knew that 
the law was on their side Ellis felt his breast swell The look of their faces, 
jeering at him like a row of yellow images, was maddening He stopped short 
‘Here 1 What are you laughing at, you young ticks?’ 

The boys turned 

‘I said what the bloody hell are you laughing at ? 5 

One of the boys answered, msolently-but perhaps his bad English made 
him seem more insolent than he intended 
‘Not your business ’ 

There was about a second during which Ellis did not know what he was 
doing In that second he had hit out with all his strength, and the cane landed, 
crack 1 right across the boy’s eyes The boy recoiled with a shriek, and in the 
same instant the other four had thrown themselves upon Ellis But he was too 
strong for them He flung them aside and sprang back, lashing out with his 
stick so furiously that none of them dared come near 
‘Keep your distance, you — s 1 Keep off, or by God I’ll smash another of you 1 ’ 
Though they were four to one he was so formidable that they surged back m 
fright The boy who was hurt had fallen on his knees with his arms across his 
face, and was screaming ‘I am blinded 1 1 am blinded 1 ’ Suddenly the other four 
turned and darted for a pile of latente, used for road-mending, which was 
twenty yards away One of Ellis’s clerks had appeared on the veranda of the 
office and was leaping up and down m agitation 

‘Come up, sir come up at once They will murder you 1 ’ 

Ellis disdained to run, but he moved for the veranda steps A lump of latente 
came sailing through the air and shattered itself against a pillar, whereat the 
clerk scooted indoors But Ellis turned on the veranda to face the boys, who 
were below, each carrying an armful of latente He was cackling with delight 
‘You damned, dirty little niggers 1 ’ he shouted down at them ‘You got a 
surprise that time, didn’t you? Come up on this veranda and fight me, all four 
of you 1 You daren’t Four to one and you daren’t face me 1 Do you call 
yourselves men? You sneaking, mangy little rats 1 ’ 

He broke into Burmese, calling them the incestuous children of pigs All the 
while they were pelting him with lumps of latente, but their arms were feeble 
and they threw ineptly He dodged the stones, and as each one missed him he 
cackled m triumph Presently there was a sound of shouts up the road, for the 
noise had been heard at the police station, and some constables were emerging 
to see what was the matter. The boys took fright and bolted, leaving Ellis a 
complete victor. 

Ellis had heartily enjoyed the affray, but he was furiously angry as soon as it 
was over He wrote a violent note to Mr Macgregor, telling him that he had 
been wantonly assaulted and demanding vengeance Two clerks who had 
witnessed the scene, and a chaprassi, were sent along to Mr Macgregor’ s office 



Burmese Days 223 

to corroborate the story They lied in perfect unison ‘The boys had attacked 
Mr Ellis without any provocation whatever, he had defended himself,’ etc*, 
etc Ellis, to do him justice, probably believed this to be a truthful version of 
the story Mr Macgregor was somewhat disturbed, and ordered the police to 
find the four schoolboys and mterrogate them The boys, however, had been 
expecting something of the kind, and were lying very low, the police searched 
the bazaar all day without finding them In the evening the wounded boy was 
taken to a Burmese doctor, who, by applying some poisonous concoction of 
crushed leaves to his left eye, succeeded in blinding him 
The Europeans met at the Club as usual that evening, except for Westfield 
and Verrall, who had not yet returned Everyone was m a bad mood Coming 
on top of the murder, the unprovoked attack on Ellis (for that was the accepted 
description of it) had scared them as well as angered them Mrs Lackersteen 
was twittering to the tune of ‘We shall all be murdered m our beds’ Mr 
Macgregor, to reassure her, told her in cases of riot the European ladies were 
always locked inside the jail until everything was over, but she did not seem 
much comforted Ellis was offensive to Flory, and Elizabeth cut him almost 
dead He had come down to the Club m the insane hope of making up their 
quarrel, and her demeanour made him so miserable that for the greater part of 
the evening he skulked m the library It was not till eight o’clock when 
everyone had swallowed a number of drinks, that the atmosphere grew a little 
more friendly, and Ellis said 

‘What about sending a couple of chokras up to our houses and getting our 
dinners sent down here? We might as well have a few lubbers of bridge Better 
than mooning about at home ’ 

Mrs Lackersteen, who was in dread of going home, jumped at the 
suggestion The Europeans occasionally dined at the Club when they wanted 
to stay late Two of the chokras were sent for, and on being told what was 
wanted of them, immediately burst mto tears It appeared that if they went up 
the hill they were certain of encountering Maxwell’s ghost The malt was sent 
instead As the man set out Flory noticed that it was again the night of the full 
moon-four weeks to a day since that evening, now unutterably remote, when 
he had kissed Elizabeth under the frangipani tree 
They had just sat down at the bridge table, and Mrs Lackersteen had just 
revoked out of pure nervousness, when there was a heavy thump on the roof 
Everyone started and look up 
‘A coco-nut falling 1 ’ said Mr Macgregor 
‘There aren’t any coco-nut trees here,’ said Ellis 

The next moment a number of things happened all together There was 
another and much louder bang, one of the petrol lamps broke from its hook 
and crashed to the ground, narrowly missing Mr Lackersteen, who jumped 
aside with a yelp, Mrs Lackersteen began screaming, and the butler rushed 
into the room, bareheaded, his face the colour of bad coffee 
‘Sir, sir 1 Bad men come 1 Going to murder us all, sir!’ 

‘What? Bad men? What do you mean? 

‘Sir, all the villagers are outside! Big stick and dah m their hands, and all 



224 Burmese Days 

dancing about' Going to cut master’s throat, sir' 5 
Mrs Lackersteen threw herself backwards in her chair She was setting up 
such a din of screams as to drown the butler’s voice 
£ Oh, be quiet' 5 said Ellis sharply, turning on her ‘Listen, all of you' Listen 
to that' 5 

There was a deep, murmurous, dangerous sound outside, like the humming 
of an angry giant Mr Macgregor, who had stood up, stiffened as he heard it, 
and settled his spectacles pugnaciously on his nose 
‘This is some kind of disturbance' Butler, pick that lamp up Miss 
Lackersteen, look to your aunt See if she is hurt The rest of you come with 
me' 5 

They all made for the front door, which someone, presumably the butler, 
had closed A fusillade of small pebbles was rattling against it like hail Mr 
Lackersteen wavered at the sound and retreated behind the others 
‘I say, dammit, bolt that bloody door, someone' 5 he said 
‘No, no' 5 said Mr Macgregor ‘We must go outside It’s fatal not to face 
them' 5 

He opened the door and presented himself boldly at the top of the steps 
There were about twenty Burmans*on the path, with dahs or sticks in their 
hands Outside the fence, stretching up the road m either direction and far out 
on to the maidan, was an enormous crowd of people. It was like a sea of people, 
two thousand at the least, black and white m the moon, with here and there a 
curved dah glittering Ellis had coolly placed himself beside Mr Macgregor, 
with his hands in his pockets Mr Lackersteen had disappeared 

Mr Macgregor raised his hand for silence ‘What is the meaning of this?’ he 
shouted sternly 

There were yells, and some lumps of latente the size of cricket balls came 
sailing from the road, but fortunately hit no one One of the men on the path 
turned and waved his arms to the others, shouting that they were not to begin 
throwing yet Then he stepped forward to address the Europeans He was a 
strong debonair fellow of about thirty, with down-curving moustaches, 
wearing a singlet, with his longyi kilted to the knee 
‘What is the meaning of this?’ Mr Macgregor repeated. 

The man spoke up with a cheerful grin, and not very insolently 
‘We have no quarrel with you, min gyi We have come for the timber 
merchant, Ellis ’ (He pronounced it Ellit ) ‘The boy whom he struck this 
morning has gone blind You must send Ellit out to us here, so that we can 
punish him The rest of you will not be hurt.’ 

‘Just remember that fellow’s face,’ said Ellis over his shoulder to Flory 
‘We’ll get him seven years for this afterwards,’ 

Mr Macgregorhad turned temporarily quite purple His rage was so great 
that it almost choked him For several moments he could not speak, and when 
he did so it was m English 

‘Whom do you think you are speaking to? In twenty years I have never heard 
such insolence' Go away this instant, or I shall call out the Military Police!’ 
‘You’d better be quick, mm gyi. We know that there is no justice for us m 



Burmese Days 22 5 

your courts, so we must punish Elht ourselves Send him out to us here 
Otherwise, all of you will weep for it ’ 

Mr Macgregor made a furious motion with his fist, as though hammering in 
a nail ‘Go away, son of a dog ! ’ he cried, using his first oath in many years 
There was a thunderous roar from the road, and such a shower of stones, 
that everyone was hit, including the Burmans on the path One stone took Mr 
Macgregor full in the face, almost knocking him down The Europeans bolted 
hastily inside and barred the door Mr Macgregor’s spectacles were smashed 
and his nose streaming blood They got back to the lounge to find Mrs 
Lackersteen looping about in one of the long chairs like a hysterical snake, Mr 
Lackersteen standing irresolutely m the middle of the room, holding an empty 
bottle, the butler on his knees in the corner, crossing himself (he was a Roman 
Catholic), the chokras crying, and only Elizabeth calm, though she was very 
pale 

‘What’s happened?’ she exclaimed 

‘We’re in the soup, that’s what’s happened 1 ’ said Ellis angrily, feeling at the 
back of his neck where a stone had hit him ‘The Burmans are all round, shying 
rocks But keep calm 1 They haven’t the guts to break the doors in ’ 

‘Call out the police at once*’ said Mr Macgregor indistinctly, for he was 
stanching his nose with his handkerchief 
‘Can’t 1 ’ said Ellis ‘I was looking round while you were talking to them 
They’ve cut us off, rot their damned souls 1 No one could possibly get to the 
police lines Veraswami’s compound is full of men ’ 

‘Then we must wait We can trust them to turn out of their own accord 
Calm yourself, my dear Mrs Lackersteen, please calm yourself* The danger is 
very small ’ 

It did not sound small There were no gaps in the noise now, and the 
Burmans seemed to be pouring into the compounds by hundreds The dm 
swelled suddenly to such a volume that no one could make himself heard 
except by shouting All the windows in the lounge had been shut, and some 
perforated zinc shutters within, which were sometimes used for keeping out 
insects, pulled to and bolted There was a series of crashes as the windows were 
broken, and then a ceaseless thudding of stones from all sides, that shook the 
thin wooden walls and seemed likely to split them Ellis opened a shutter and 
flung a bottle viciously among the crowd, but a dozen stones came hurtling m 
and he had to close the shutter hurriedly The Burmans seemed to have no plan 
beyond flinging stones, yelling and hammering at the walls, but the mere 
volume of noise was unnerving The Europeans were half dazed by it at first 
None of them thought to blame Ellis, the sole cause of this affair, their 
common peril seemed, indeed, to draw them closer together for the while Mr 
Macgregor, half-blind without his spectacles, stood distractedly m the middle 
of the room, yielding his right hand to Mrs Lackersteen, who was caressing it, 
while a weeping chokra clung to his left leg Mr Lackersteen had vanished 
again. EUis was stamping furiously up and down, shaking his fist in the 
direction of the police lines 

‘Where are the police, the f*-— cowardly sods?’ he yelled, heedless of the 



226 Burmese Days 

women ‘Why don’t they turn out? My God, we won’t get another chance like 
this in a hundred years' If we’d only ten rifles here, how we could slosh these 
b— s' 5 

‘They’ll be here presently 1 ’ Mr Macgregor shouted back ‘It will take them 
some minutes to penetrate that crowd ’ 

‘But why don’t they use their rifles, the miserable sons of bitches? They 
could slaughter them in bloody heaps if they’d only open fire Oh, God, to 
think of missing a chance like this 1 ’ 

A lump of rock burst one of the zinc shutters Another followed through the 
hole it had made, stove in a ‘Bonzo’ picture, bounced off, cut Elizabeth’s 
elbow, and finally landed on the table There was a roar of triumph from 
outside, and then a succession of tremendous thumps on the roof Some 
children had climbed into the trees and were havmg the time of their lives 
sliding down the roof on their bottoms Mrs Lackersteen outdid all previous 
efforts with a shriek that rose easily above the din outside 

‘Choke that bloody hag, somebody 1 ’ cried Ellis ‘Anyone’d think a pig was 
being killed We’ve got to do something Flory, Macgregor, come here 1 Think 
of a way out of this mess, someone 1 ’ 

Elizabeth had suddenly lost her nerve and begun crying The blow from the 
stone had hurt her To Flory’ s astonishment, he found her clinging tightly to 
his arm Even in that moment it made his heart turn over He had been 
watching the scene almost with detachment- dazed by the noise, indeed, but 
not much frightened He always found it difficult to believe Orientals could be 
really dangerous Only when he felt Elizabeth’s hand on his arm did he grasp 
the seriousness of the situation 

‘Oh, Mr Flory, please, please think of something 1 You can, you can 1 
Anything sooner than let those dreadful men get in here 1 ’ 

‘If only one of us could get to the police lines'’ groaned Mr Macgregor ‘A 
British officer to lead them' At the worst I must try and go myself ’ 

‘Don’t be a fool' Only get your throat cut'’ yelled Ellis *1*11 go if they really 
look like breaking m But, oh, to be killed by swine like that' How furious it’d 
make me' And to think we could murder the whole bloody crowd if only we 
could get the police here'’ 

‘Couldn’t someone get along the river bank?’ Flory shouted despairingly 
‘Hopeless' Hundreds of them prowling up and down We’re cut 
off-Burmans on three sides and the river on the other'’ 

‘The river 1 ’ 

One of those startling ideas that are overlooked simply because they are so 
obvious had sprung into Flory’s mind 
‘The nver' Of course! We can get to the police lines as easy as winking, 
Don’t you see?’ 

‘How?’ 

‘Why, down the nver-ifi the water' Swim!’ 

‘Oh, good man!’ cried Ellis, and smacked Flory on the shoulder Elizabeth 
squeezed his arm and actually danced a step or two in glee ‘I’ll go if you like!’ 
Ellis shouted, but Flory shook his head. He had already begun slipping his 



Burmese Days 227 

shoes off There was obviously no time to be lost The Burmans had behaved 
like fools hitherto, but there was no saying what might happen if they 
succeeded m breaking m The butler, who had got over his first fright, 
prepared to open the window that gave on the lawn, and glanced obliquely out 
There were barely a score of Burmans on the lawn They had left the back of 
the Club unguarded, supposing that the river cut off retreat 

‘Rush down the lawn like helli’ Ellis shouted in Flory’s ear ‘They’ll scatter 
all right when they see you ’ 

‘Order the police to open fire at once*’ shouted Mr Macgregor from the 
other side ‘You have my authority ’ 

‘And tell them to aim low 1 No firing over their heads Shoot to kill In the 
guts for choice 1 ’ 

Flory leapt down from the veranda, hurting his feet on the hard earth, and 
was at the river bank in six paces As Ellis had said, the Burmans recoiled for a 
moment when they saw him leaping down A few stones followed him, but no 
one pursued-they thought, no doubt, that he was only attempting to escape, 
and m the clear moonlight they could see that it was not Ellis In another 
moment he had pushed his way through the bushes and was in the water 

He sank deep down, and the horrible river ooze received him, sucking him 
knee-deep so that it was several seconds before he could free himself When he 
came to the surface a tepid froth, like the froth on stout, was lapping round his 
lips, and some spongy thing had floated into his throat and was choking him It 
was a sprig of water hyacinth He managed to spit it out, and found that the 
swift current had floated him twenty yards already Burmans were rushing 
rather aimlessly up and down the bank, yelling With his eye at the level of the 
water, Flory could not see the crowd besieging the Club, but he could hear 
their deep, devilish roaring, which sounded even louder than it had sounded 
on shore By the time he was opposite the Military Police lines the bank 
seemed almost bare of men He managed to struggle out of the current and 
flounder through the mud, which sucked off his left sock A little way down the 
bank two old men were sitting beside a fence, sharpening fence-posts, as 
though there had not been a not within a hundred miles of them Flory 
crawled ashore, clambered over the fence and ran heavily across the 
moonwhite parade-ground, his wet trousers sagging As far as he could tell in 
the noise, the lines were quite empty In some stalls over to the right Verrall’s 
horses were plunging about m a pamc Flory ran out on to the road, and saw 
what had happened 

The whole body of policemen, military and civil, about a hundred and fifty 
men in all, had attacked the crowd from the rear, armed only with sticks. They 
had been utterly engulfed The crowd was so dense that it was like an 
enormous swarm of bees seething and rotating Everywhere one could see 
policemen wedged helplessly among the hordes of Burmans, struggling 
furiously but uselessly, and too cramped even to use their sticks Whole knots 
of men were tangled LaocoOn-like in the folds of unrolled pagns There was a 
terrific bellowing of oaths in three or four languages, clouds of dust, and a 
suffocating stench of sweat and marigolds-but no one seemed to have been 



228 Burmese Days 

seriously hurt Probably the Burmans had not used their dahs for fear of 
provoking rifle-fire Flory pushed his way into the crowd and was immediately 
swallowed up like the others A sea of bodies closed m upon him and flung him 
from side to side, bumping his ribs and choking him with their animal heat He 
struggled onwards with an almost dreamlike feeling, so absurd and unreal was 
the situation The whole not had been ludicrous from the start, and what was 
most ludicrous of all was that the Burmans, who might have killed him, did not 
know what to do with him now he was among them Some yelled insults in his 
face, some jostled him and stamped on his feet, some even tried to make way 
for him, as a white man He was not certain whether he was fighting for his life, 
or merely pushing his way through the crowd For quite a long time he was 
jammed, helpless, with his arms pinned against his sides, then he found 
himself wrestling with a stumpy Burman much stronger than himself, then a 
dozen men rolled against him like a wave and drove him deeper into the heart 
of the crowd Suddenly he felt an agonizing pam m his right big toe- someone 
in boots had trodden on it It was the Military Police subahdar, a Rajput, very 
fat, moustachioed, with his pagn gone He was grasping a Burman by the 
throat and trying to hammer his face, while the sweat rolled off his bare, bald 
crown Flory threw his arm round the subahdar’s neck and managed to tear 
him away from his adversary and shout m his ear His Urdu deserted him, and 
he bellowed m Burmese 

‘Why did you not open fire? 5 

For a long time he could not hear the man’s answer Then he caught it 
t Hukm ne ay a’ -l have had no orderr 1 ’ 

‘Idiot 1 ’ 

At this moment another bunch of men drove against them, and for a minute 
or two they were pinned and quite unable to move Flory realized that the 
subahdar had a whistle m his pocket and was trying to get at it Finally he got it 
loose and blew piercing blasts, but there was no hope of rallying any men until 
they could get into a clear space It was a fearful labour to struggle out of the 
crowd-it was like wading neck-deep through a viscous sea At times the 
exhaustion of Flory’s limbs was so complete that he stood passive, letting the 
crowd hold him and even drive him backwards At last, more from the natural 
eddying of the crowd than by his own effort, he found himself flung out into 
the open The subahdar had also emerged, ten or fifteen sepoys, and a Burmese 
Inspector of Police Most of the sepoys collapsed on their haunches almost 
falling with fatigue, and limping, their feet having been trampled on 
‘Come on, get up' Run like hell for the lines 1 Get some rifles and a clip of 
ammunition each.’ 

He was too overcome even to speak in Burmese, but the men understood 
him and lopped heavily towards the police lines Flory followed them, to get 
away from the crowd before they turned on him again When he reached the 
gate the sepoys were returning with their rifles and already preparing to fire 
‘The sahib will give the order' 5 the subahdar panted 
‘Here you' 5 cried Flory to the Inspector ‘Can you speak Hindustani?’ 

‘Yes, sir ’ 



Burmese Days 229 

‘Then tell them to fire high, right over the people’s heads And above all, to 
fire all together Make them understand that ’ 

The fat Inspector, whose Hindustani was even worse than Flory’s, explained 
what was wanted, chiefly by leaping up and down and gesticulating The 
sepoys raised their rifles, there was a roar, and a rolling echo from the hillside 
For a moment Flory thought that his order had been disregarded, for almost 
the entire section of the crowd nearest them had fallen like a swath of hay 
However, they had only flung themselves down in panic The sepoys fired a 
second volley, but it was not needed The crowd had immediately begun to 
surge outwards from the Club like a river changing its course They came 
pouring down the road, saw the armed men barring their way, and tried to 
recoil, whereupon there was a fresh battle between those in front and those 
behind, finally the whole crowd bulged outwards and began to roll slowly up 
the maidan Flory and the sepoys moved slowly towards the Club on the heels 
of the retreating crowd The policemen who had been engulfed were straggling 
back by ones and twos Their pagns were gone and their puttees trailing yards 
behind them, but they had no damage worse than bruises The Civil 
Policemen were dragging a very few prisoners among them When they 
reached the Club compound the Burmans were still pouring out, an endless 
line of young men leaping gracefully through a gap in the hedge like a 
procession of gazelles It seemed to Flory that it was getting very dark A small 
white-clad figure extricated itself from the last of the crowd and tumbled 
limply into Flory’s arms It was Dr Veraswami, with his tie torn off but his 
spectacles miraculously unbroken 
‘Doctor 1 ’ 

‘Ach, my friend' Ach, how I am exhausted 1 ’ 

‘What are you doing here 7 * Were you right m the middle of that crowd 7 *’ 

‘I was trying to restrain them, my friend It was hopeless until you came 
But there is at least one man who bears the mark of this, I think 1 ’ 

He held out a small fist for Flory to see the damaged knuckles But it was 
certainly quite dark now At the same moment Flory heard a nasal voice 
behind him 

‘Well, Mr Flory, so it’s all over already' A mere flash m the pan as usual You 
and I together were a little too much for them-ha, ha 1 ’ 

It was U Po Kym He came towards them with a martial air, carrying a huge 
stick, and with a revolver thrust into his belt His dress was a studious 
n6glig6-smg\zt and Shan trousers-to give the impression that he had rushed 
out of his house post-haste He had been lying low until the danger should be 
over, and was now hurrying forth to grab a share of any credit that might be 
going 

‘A smart piece of work, sir' 5 he said enthusiastically ‘Look how they are 
flying up the hillside' We have routed them most satisfactory ’ 
l We n panted the doctor indignantly 

‘Ah, my dear doctor' I did not perceive that you were there It is possible 
that you also have been in the fighting 7 * Yuw-risking your most valuable life! 
Who would have believed such a thing 7 *’ 



2 so Burmese Days 

‘You’ve taken your time getting here yourself 5 said Flory angrily 

‘Well, well sir, it is enough that we have dispersed them Although,’ he 
added with a touch of satisfaction, for he had noticed Flory’ s tone, ‘they are 
going in the direction of the European houses, you will observe I fancy that it 
will occur to them to do a little plundering on their way ’ 

One had to admire the man’s impudence He tucked his great stick under his 
arm and strolled beside Flory m an almost patronizing manner, while the 
doctor dropped behind, abashed m spite of himself At the Club gate all three 
men halted It was now extraordinarily dark, and the moon had vanished Low 
overhead, just visible, black clouds were streaming eastward like a pack of 
hounds A wind, almost cold, blew down the hillside and swept a cloud of dust 
and fine water-vapour before it There was a sudden intensely rich scent of 
damp The wind quickened, the trees rustled, then began beating themselves 
furiously together, the big frangipani tree by the tennis court flinging out a 
nebula of dimly seen blossom All three men turned and hurried for shelter, 
the Orientals to their houses, Flory to the Club It had begun raining 



Next day the town was quieter than a cathedral city on Monday morning It is 
usually the case after a not Except for the handful of prisoners, everyone who 
could possibly have been concerned in the attack on the Club had a watertight 
alibi The Club garden looked as though a herd of bison had stampeded across 
it, but the houses had not been plundered, and there were no new casualties 
among the Europeans, except that after everything was over Mr Lackersteen 
had been found very drunk under the billiard-table, where he had retired with 
a bottle of whisky Westfield and Verrall came back early m the morning, 
bringing Maxwell’s murderers under arrest, or at any rate, bringing two 
people who would presently be hanged for Maxwell’s murder Westfield, 
when he heard the news of the riot, was gloomy but resigned Again it 
happened-a veritable not, and he not there to quell it* It seemed fated that he 
should never kill a man Depressmg, depressing Verrall’s only comment was 
that it had been ‘damned lip’ on the part of Flory (a civilian) to give orders to 
the Military Police 

Meanwhile, it was raining almost without cease As soon as he woke up and 
heard the ram hammering on the roof Flory dressed and hurried out, Flo 
following Out of sight of the houses he took off his clothes and let the ram 
sluice down on his bare body To his surprise, he found that he was covered 
with bruises from last night; but the ram had washed away every trace of his 
prickly heat within three minutes It is wonderful, the healing power of ram- 
water Flory walked down to Dr Veraswami’s house, with his shoes squelching 



Burmese Days 2 31 

and periodical jets of water flowing down his neck from the brim of his Terai 
hat The sky was leaden, and innumerable whirling storms chased one another 
across the maidan like squadrons of cavalry Burmans passed, under vast 
wooden hats m spite of which their bodies streamed water like the bronze gods 
in the fountains A network of rivulets was already washing the stones of the 
road bare The doctor had just got home when Flory arrived, and was shaking 
a wet umbrella over the veranda rail He hailed Flory excitedly 
‘Come up, Mr Flory, come up at once 1 You are just apropos I wass on the 
point of opening a bottle of Old Tommy Gin Come up and let me drmk to 
your health, ass the saviour of Kyauktada' 5 
They had a long talk together The doctor was m a triumphant mood It 
appeared that what had happened last night had righted his troubles almost 
miraculously U Po Kym’s schemes were undone The doctor was no longer at 
his mercy-m fact, it was the other way about The doctor explained to Flory 
‘You see, my friend, this not-or rather, your most noble behaviour m 
lt-wass quite outside U Po Kym’s programme He had started the so-called 
rebellion and had the glory of crushing it, and he calculated that any further 
outbreak would simply mean more glory still I am told that when he heard of 
Mr Maxwell’s death, hiss joy was positively’-the doctor nipped his thumb and 
forefinger together-‘what iss the word I want?’ 

‘Obscene?’ 

‘Ah yes Obscene It iss said that actually he attempted to dance-can you 
imagine such a disgusting spectacle?-and exclaimed, ‘‘Now at least they will 
take my rebellion seriously 1 ” Such iss his regard for human life But now hiss 
triumph iss at an end The not hass tripped up m mid-career ’ 

‘How?’ 

‘Because, do you not see, the honours of the riot are not hiss, but yours' And 
I am known to be your friend I stand, so to speak, in the reflection of your 
glory Are you not the hero of the hour? Did not your European friends receive 
you with open arms when you returned to the Club last night?’ 

‘They did, I must admit It was quite a new experience for me Mrs 
Lackersteen was all Over me “ Dear Mr Flory”, she calls me now And she’s 
got her kmfe properly m Ellis She hasn’t forgotten that he called her a bloody 
hag and told her to stop squealing like a pig ’ 

‘Ah, Mr Ellis iss sometimes over-emphatic in hiss expressions I have 
noticed it ’ 

‘The only fly in the ointment is that I told the police to fire over the crowd’s 
heads instead of straight at them It seems that’s against all the Government 
regulations Ellis was a little vexed about it “Why didn’t you plug some of the 
b — s when you had the chance?” he said I pointed out that it would have 
meant hitting the police who were m the middle of the crowd, but as he said, 
they were only niggers anyway However, all my sins are forgiven me And 
Macgregor quoted something in Latm-Horace, I believe/ 

It was half an hour later when Flory walked along to the Club He had 
promised to see Mr Macgregor and settle the busmess of the doctor’s election 
But there would be no difficulty about it now The others would eat out of his 



2 32 Burmese Days 

hand until the absurd not was forgotten, he could have gone into the Club and 
made a speech in favour of Lenm, and they would have put up with it The 
lovely rain streamed down, drenching him from head to foot, and filling his 
nostrils with the scent of earth, forgotten during the bitter months of drought 
He walked up the wrecked garden, where the malt , bending down with the rain 
splashing on his bare back, was trowelling holes for zinnias Nearly all the 
flowers had been trampled out of existence, Elizabeth was there, on the side 
veranda, almost as though she were waiting for him He took off his hat, 
spilling a pool of water from the brim, and went round to join her 
‘Good morning 1 ’ he said, raising his voice because of the ram that beat 
noisily on the low roof 

‘Good morning' Isn’t it coming down? Simply pelting^ 

‘Oh, this isn’t real rain Y ou wait till July The whole Bay of Bengal is going 
to pour itself on us, by instalments 5 

It seemed that they must never meet without talking of the weather 
Nevertheless, her face said something very different from the banal words Her 
demeanour had changed utterly since last mght He took courage 
‘How is the place where that stone hit you?’ 

She held her arm out to him and let him take it Her air was gentle, even 
submissive He realized that his exploit of last night had made him almost a 
hero in her eyes She could not know how small the danger had really been, and 
she forgave him everything, even Ma Hla May, because he had shown courage 
at the right moment It was the buffalo and the leopard over again His heart 
thumped m his breast. He slipped his hand down her arm and clasped her 
fingers m his own 
‘Elizabeth-’ 

‘Someone will see us!’ she said, and she withdrew her hand, but not angrily 
‘Elizabeth, I’ve something I want to say to you Do you remember a letter I 
wrote you from the jungle, after our- some weeks ago?’ 

‘Yes ’ 

‘You remember what I said m it?’ 

‘Yes I’m sorry I didn’t answer it Only-’ 

‘I couldn’t expect you to answer it, then But I just wanted to remind you of 
what I said ’ 

In the letter, of course, he had only said, and feebly enough,that he loved 
her-would always love her, no matter what happened They were standing 
face to face, very close together. On an impulse-and it was so swiftly done that 
, afterwards he had difficulty m believing that it had ever happened-he took her 
m his arms and drew her towards him For a moment she yielded and let him 
lift up her face and kiss her, then suddenly she recpiled and shook her head 
Perhaps she was frightened that someone would see them, perhaps it was only 
because his moustache was so wet from the ram Without saying anything 
more she broke from him and hurried away into the Club There was a look of 
distress or compunction m her face, but she did not seem angry 
He followed her more slowly into the Club, and ran into Mr Macgregor, 
who was in a very good humour As soon as he saw Flory he boomed genially, 



Burmese Days 23 3 

‘Aha 1 The conquering hero comes 1 ’ and then, m a more serious vein, offered 
him fresh congratulations Flory improved the occasion by saying a few words 
on behalf of the doctor He painted quite a lively picture of the doctor’s 
heroism in the not ‘He was right m the middle of the crowd, fighting like a 
tiger,’ etc , etc It was not too much exaggerated-for the doctor had certainly 
risked his life Mr Macgregor was impressed, and so were the others when they 
heard of it At all times the testimony of one European can do an Oriental more 
good than that of a thousand of his fellow countrymen, and at this moment 
Flory’s opinion carried weight Practically, the doctor’s good name was 
restored His election to the Club could be taken as assured 

However, it was not finally agreed upon yet, because Flory was returmng to 
camp He set out the same evemng, marching by mght, and he did not see 
Elizabeth again before leaving It was quite safe to travel in the jungle now, for 
the futile rebellion was obviously finished There is seldom any talk of 
rebellion after the rams have started-the Burmans are too busy ploughing, and 
in any case the waterlogged fields are impassable for large bodies of men Flory 
was to return to Kyauktada in ten days, when the padre’s six-weekly visit fell 
due The truth was that he did not care to be in Kyauktada while both 
Elizabeth and Verrall were there And yet, it was strange, but all the 
bitterness-all the obscene, crawling envy that had tormented him before-was 
gone now that he knew she had forgiven him It was only Verrall who stood 
between them now And even the thought of her in Verrall’s arms could hardly 
move him, because he knew that at the worst the affair must have an end 
Verrall, it was quite certain, would never marry Elizabeth, young men of 
Verrall’s stamp do not marry penmless girls met casually at obscure Indian 
stations He was only amusing himself with Elizabeth Presently he would 
desert her, and she would return to him-to Flory It was enough-it was far 
better than he had hoped There is a humility about genuine love that is rather 
horrible m some ways 

U Po Kyin was furiously angry The miserable riot had taken him unawares, 
so far as anything ever took him unawares, and it was like a handful of grit 
thrown into the machinery of his plans The business of disgracing the doctor 
had got to be begun all over again Begun it was, sure enough, with such a spate 
of anonymous letters that Hla Pe had to absent himself from office for two 
whole days-it was bronchitis this time-to get them written The doctor was 
accused of every crime from pederasty to stealmg Government postage 
stamps The prison warder who had let Nga Shwe O escape had now come up 
for trial He was triumphantly acquitted, U Po Kyin having spent as much as 
two hundred rupees in bribing the witnesses. More letters showered up on Mr 
Macgregor, proving lh ^detail that Dr Veraswami, the real author of the escape, 
had tried to shift the blame on to a helpless subordinate. Nevertheless, the 
results were disappointing. The confidential letter which Mr Macgregor wrote 
to the Commissioner, reporting on the not, was steamed open, and its tone was 
so alarmmg-Mr Macgregor had spoken of the doctor as "behaving most 
creditably’ on the mght of the not—that 0 Po Kym called a council of war. 

‘The tune has come for a vigorous move,’ he said to the others-they wore m 



2 34 Burmese Days 

conclave on the front veranda, before breakfast Ma Kin was there, and Ba 
Sem and Hla Pe-the latter a bright-faced, promising boy of eighteen, with the 
manner of one who will certainly succeed m life 

‘We are hammering against a brick wall,’ U Po Kyin continued, ‘and that 
wall is Flory Who could have foreseen that that miserable coward would stand 
by his friend? However, there it is So long as Veras wami has his backing, we 
are helpless ’ 

‘I have been talking to the Club butler, sir,’ said Ba Sem ‘He tells me that 
Mr Ellis and Mr Westfield still do not want the doctor to be elected to the 
Club Do you not think they will quarrel with Flory again as soon as this 
busmess of the riot is forgotten?’ 

‘Of course they will quarrel, they always quarrel But m the meantime the 
harm is done Just suppose that man were elected 1 1 believe I should die of rage 
if it happened No, there is only one move left We must strike at Flory 
himself i’ 

‘At Flory, sir* But he is a white man 1 ’ 

‘What do I care? I have ruined white men before now Once let Flory be 
disgraced, and there is an end of the doctor And he shall be disgraced! I will 
shame him so that he will never dare show his face in that Club again 1 ’ 

‘But, sir 1 A white man’ What are we to accuse him oP Who would believe 
anything against a white man?’ 

‘Y ou have no strategy, Ko Ba Sem One does not accuse a white man, one has 
got to catch him in the act Public disgrace, m flagrante delicto I shall know 
how to set about it Now be silent while I think ’ 

There was a pause U Po Kym stood gazing out into the rain with his small 
hands clasped behind him and resting on the natural plateau of his posterior 
The other three watched him from the end of the veranda, almost frightened 
by this talk of attacking a white man, and waiting for some masterstroke to 
cope with a situation that was beyond them It was a little like the familiar 
picture (is it Meissonier’s?) of Napoleon at Moscow, poring over his maps 
while his marshals wait m silence, with their cocked hats m their hands But of 
course U Po Kym was more equal to the situation than Napoleon His plan was 
ready within two minutes When he turned round his vast face was suffused 
with excessive joy The doctor had been mistaken when he described U Po 
Kyin as attempting to dance, U Po Kyin’s figure was not designed for dancing, 
but, had it been so designed, he would have danced at this moment He 
beckofted to Ba Sem and whispered m his ear for a few seconds 
‘That is the correct move, I think?’ he concluded 
Abroad, unwilling, incredulous grin stole slowly across Ba Sem’s face 
‘Fifty rupees ought to cover all the expenses,’ added U Po Kym, beaming 
The plan was unfolded in detail And when the others had taken it in, all of 
them, even Ba Sein, who seldom laughed, even Ma Km, who disapproved 
from the bottom of her soul, burst into irrepressible peals of laughter The 
plan was really too good to be resisted It was genius. 

Ail the while it was raining, raining The day after Flory went back to camp 
it rained for thirty-eight hours at a stretch, sometimes slowing to the pace of 



Burmese Days 2 33 

English ram, sometimes pouring down in such cataracts that one thought the 
whole ocean must by now have been sucked up into the clouds The rattling on 
the roof became maddening after a few hours In the intervals between the ram 
the sun glared as fiercely as ever, the mud began to crack and steam, and 
patches of prickly heat sprang out all over one’s body Hordes of flying beetles 
had emerged from their cocoons as soon as the ram started, there was a plague 
of loathly creatures known as stink-bugs, which invaded the houses m 
incredible numbers, littered themselves over the dming-table and made one’s 
food uneatable Verrall and Elizabeth still went out riding in the evenings, 
when the rain was not too fierce To Verrall, all climates were alike, but he did 
not like to see his pomes plastered with mud Nearly a week went by Nothing 
was changed between them-they were neither less nor more intimate than 
they had been before The proposal of marriage, still confidently expected, was 
still unuttered Then an alarming thing happened The news filtered to the 
Club, through Mr Macgregor, that Verrall was leaving Kyauktada, the 
Military Police were to be kept at Kyauktada, but another officer was coming 
in Verrall’s place, no one was certain when Elizabeth was m horrible suspense 
Surely, if he was going away, he must say something definite soon? She could 
not question him-dared not even ask him whether he was really going, she 
could only wait for him to speak He said nothing Then one evening, without 
warning, he failed to turn up at the Club And two whole days passed during 
which Elizabeth did not see him at all 

It was dreadful, but there was nothing that could be done Verrall and 
Elizabeth had been inseparable for weeks, and yet m a way they were almost 
strangers He had kept himself so aloof from them all-had never even seen the 
inside of the Lackersteens’ house They did not know him well enough to seek 
him out at the da&bungalow, or write to him, nor did he reappear at morning 
parade on the maidan There was nothing to do except wait until he chose to 
present himself again And when he did, would he ask her to marry him? 
Surely, surely he must* Both Elizabeth and her aunt (but neither of them had 
even spoken of it openly) held it as an article of faith that he must ask her 
Elizabeth looked forward to their next meeting with a hope that was almost 
painful Please God it would be a week at least before he went’ If she rode with 
him four times more, or three times -even if it were only twice, all might yet be 
well Please God he would come back to her soon* It was unthinkable that 
when he came, it would only be to say good-bye* The two women went down 
to the Club each evening and sat there until quite late, listening for Verrall’s 
footsteps outside while seeming not to listen, but he never appeared Ellis, who 
understood the situation perfectly, watched Elizabeth with spiteful 
amusement What made it worst of all was that Mr Lackersteen was now 
pestering Elizabeth unceasingly He had become quite reckless Almost under 
the eyes of the servants he would waylay her, catch hold of her and begin pinch- 
ing and fondling her in the most revolting way Her sole defence was to threaten 
that she would tell her aunt, happily he was too stupid to realize that she would 
never dare do it 

On the third morning Elizabeth and her aunt arrived at the Club just m time 



2 36 Burmese Days 

to escape a violent storm of rain They had been sitting m the lounge for a few 
minutes when they heard the sound of someone stamping the water off his 
shoes m the passage Each woman’s heart stirred, for this might be Verrall 
Then a young man entered the lounge, unbuttoning a long raincoat as he came 
He was a stout, rollicking, chuckle-headed youth of about twenty-five, with fat 
fresh cheeks, butter-coloured hair, no forehead, and, as it turned out 
afterwards, a deafening laugh 

Mrs Lacker steen made some inarticulate sound-it was jerked out of her by 
her disappointment The youth, however, hailed them with immediate 
bonhomie, being one of those who are on terms of slangy intimacy with 
everyone from the moment of meeting them 
‘Hullo, hullo 1 ’ he said ‘Enter the fairy prince' Hope I don’t sort of intrude 
and all that? Not shoving m on any family gatherings or anything?’ 

‘Not at all 1 ’ said Mrs Lacker steen m surprise 

‘What I mean to say-thought I’d just pop in at the Club and have a glance 
round, don’t you know Just to get acclimatized to the local brand of whisky I 
only got here last night ’ 

‘Are you stationed here?’ said Mrs Lackersteen, mystified-for they had not 
been expecting any newcomers 

‘Yes, rather Pleasure’s mine, entirely ’ 

‘But we hadn’t heard Oh, of course' I suppose you’re from the Forest 
Department? In place of poor Mr Maxwell?’ 

‘What? Forest Department? No fear' I’m the new Military Police bloke, you 
know ’ 

‘The-what?’ 

‘New Military Police bloke Taking over from dear ole Verrall The dear ole 
chap got orders to go back to his regiment Going off in a fearful hurry And a 
nice mess he’s left everything m for yours truly, too ’ 

The Military Policeman was a crass youth, but even he noticed that 
Elizabeth’s face turned suddenly sickly She found herself quite unable to 
speak It was several seconds before Mrs Lackersteen managed to exclaim 
‘Mr Verrall-gomg? Surely he isn’t going away yet*’ 

‘Going? He’s gone'’ 

‘Gowe?’ 

‘Well, what I mean to say-train’s due to start in about half an hour He’ll be 
along at the station now, I sent a fatigue party to look after him Got to get his 
ponies aboard and all that ’ 

There were probably further explanations, but neither Elizabeth nor her 
aunt heard a word of them In any case, without even a good-bye to the 
Military Policeman, they were out on the front steps within fifteen seconds 
Mrs Lackersteen called sharply for the butler 
‘Butler' Send my rickshaw round to the front at once' To the station, jaW’ 
she added as the nckshaw-man appeared, and, having settled herself in the 
rickshaw, poked him in the back with the ferrule of her umbrella to start him 
Elizabeth had put on her raincoat and Mrs Lackersteen was cowering in the 
nckshaw behind her umbrella, but neither was much use against the ram It 



Burmese Days 2 37 

came driving towards them in such sheets that Elizabeth’s frock was soaked 
before they had reached the gate, and the rickshaw almost overturned m the 
wind The rickshaw- wallah put his head down and struggled into it, groaning 
Elizabeth was m agony It was a mistake, surely it was a mistake He had 
written to her and the letter had gone astray That was it, that must be it' It 
could not be that he had meant to leave her without even saying good-bye 1 And 
if it were so-no, not even then would she give up hope 1 When he saw her on the 
platform, for the last time, he could not be so brutal as to forsake her 1 As they 
neared the station she fell behind the rickshaw and pinched her cheeks to bring 
the blood into them A squad of Military Police sepoys shuffled hurriedly by, 
their thin uniforms sodden into rags, pushing a handcart among them Those 
would be Verrall’s fatigue party Thank God, there was a quarter of an hour 
yet The train was not due to leave for another quarter of an hour Thank God, 
at least, for this last chance of seeing him 1 
They arrived on the platform just m time to see the tram draw out of the 
station and gather speed with a series of deafemng snorts The stationmaster, a 
little round, black man, was standing on the line looking ruefully after the 
tram, and holding his waterproof-covered topi on to his head with one hand, 
while with the other he fended off two clamorous Indians who were bobbing at 
him and trying to thrust something upon his attention Mrs Lackersteen 
leaned out of the rickshaw and called agitatedly through the ram 
‘Stationmaster 1 ’ 

‘Madam 1 ’ 

‘What tram is that’’ 

‘That is the Mandalay tram, madam ’ 

‘The Mandalay tram 1 It can’t be 1 ’ 

‘But I assure you, madam' It is precisely the Mandalay tram ’ He came 
towards them, removing his topi 

‘But Mr Verrall-the Police officer’ Surely he’s not on it? 

‘Yes, madam, he have departed ’ He waved his hand towards the tram, now 
receding rapidly in a cloud of ram and steam 
‘But the train wasn’t due to start yet 1 ’ 

‘No, madam Not due to start for another ten minutes ’ 

‘Then why has it gone’’ 

The stationmaster waved his topi apologetically from side to side His dark, 
squabby face looked quite distressed 

‘I know, madam, I know' Most unprecedented' But the young Military 
Police officer have positively commanded me to start the train' He declare that 
all is ready and he do not wish to be kept waiting I point out the irregularity 
He say he do not care about irregularity I expostulate He insist And in 
short-’ 

He made another gesture It meant that Verrall was the kind of man who 
would have his way, even when it came to starting a train ten minutes early 
There was a pause The two Indians, imagining that they saw their chance, 
suddenly rushed forward, wailing, and offered some grubby notebooks for 
Mrs Lackersteen 5 s inspection 



2 38 Burmese Days 

‘What do these men want’’ cried Mrs Lackersteen distractedly 
‘They are grass-wallahs, madam They say that Lieutenant Verrall have 
departed owing them large sums of money One for hay, the other for corn Of 
mine it is no affair ’ 

There was a hoot from the distant tram It rolled round the bend, like a 
black-behinded caterpillar that looks over its shoulder as it goes, and vanished 
The stationmaster’s wet white trousers flapped forlornly about his legs 
Whether Verrall had started the train early to escape Elizabeth, or to escape 
the grass-wallahs, was an interesting question that was never cleared up 
They made their way back along the road, and then struggled up the hill in 
such a wind that sometimes they were driven several paces backwards When 
they gained the veranda they were quite out of breath The servants took their 
streaming raincoats, and Elizabeth shook some of the water from her hair Mrs 
Lackersteen broke her silence for the first time since they had left the station 
‘ Well ' Of all the unmannerly-of the simply abominable •’ 

Elizabeth looked pale and sickly, m spite of the ram and wind that had 
beaten into her face But she would betray nothing 
‘I think he might have waited to say good-bye to us,’ she said coldly 
‘Take my word for it, dear, you are thoroughly well rid of him' As I said 
from the start, a most odious young man 1 ’ 

Some time later, when they were sitting down to breakfast, having bathed 
and got into dry clothes, and feeling better, she remarked 
‘Let me see, what day is this’’ 

‘Saturday, Aunt ’ 

‘Ah, Saturday Then the dear padre will be arriving this evemng How many 
shall we be for the service tomorrow’ Why, I think we shall all be here 1 How 
very nice* Mr Flory will be here too I think he said he was coming back from 
the jungle tomorrow ’ She added almost lovingly, ‘ Dear Mr Flory r ’ 



It was nearly six o’clock m the evemng, and the absurd bell in the six-foot tm 
steeple of the church went clank-clank, clank-clank^ as old Mattu pulled the 
rope within The rays of the setting sun, refracted by distant rainstorms, 
flooded the maidan with a beautiful, lurid light It had been raining earlier in 
the day, and would ram again The Christian community of Kyauktada, fifteen 
in number, were gathering at the church door for the evemng service 
Flory was already there, and Mr Macgregor, grey topi and all, and Mr 
Francis and Mr Samuel, frisking about m freshly laundered drill suits- for the 
six-weekly church service was the great social event of their lives The padre, a 
tall man with grey hair and a refined, discoloured face, wearing pince-nez, was 
standing on the church steps in his cassock and surplice, which he had put on 



Burmese Pays 2 39 

in Mr Macgregor’s house He was smiling m an amiable but rather helpless 
way at four pink-cheeked Karen Christians who had come to make their bows 
to him, for he did not speak a word of their language nor they of his There was 
one other Oriental Christian, a mournful, dark Indian of uncertain race, who 
stood humbly m the background He was always present at the church 
services, but no one knew who he was or why he was a Christian Doubtless he 
had been captured and baptized m infancy by the missionaries, for Indians 
who are converted when adults almost invariably lapse 
Flory could see Elizabeth coming down the hill, dressed m lilac-colour, with 
her aunt and uncle He had seen her that morning at the Club-they had had 
just a minute alone together before the others came in He had only asked her 
one question 

‘Has Verrall gone-for good?’ 

‘Yes’ 

There had been no need to say any more He had simply taken her by the 
arms and drawn her towards him She came willingly, even gladly-there in the 
clear daylight, merciless to his disfigured face For a moment she had clung to 
him almost like a child It was a though he had saved her or protected her from 
something He raised her face to kiss her, and found with surprise that she was 
crying There had been no time to talk then, not even to say, ‘Will you marry 
me?’ No matter, after the service there would be time enough Perhaps at his 
next visit, only six weeks hence, the padre would marry them 
Ellis and Westfield and the new Military Policeman were approaching from 
the Club, where they had been having a couple of quick ones to last them 
through the service The Forest Officer who had been sent to take Maxwell’s 
place, a sallow, tall man, completely bald except for two whisker-like tufts in 
front of his ears, was following them Flory had not time to say more than 
‘Good evening’ to Elizabeth when she arrived Mattu, seeing that everyone 
was present, stopped ringing the bell, and the clergyman led the way inside, 
followed by Mr Macgregor, with his topi against his stomach, and the 
Lackersteens and the native Christians Ellis pinched Flory’s elbow and 
whispered boozily in his ear 

‘Come on, lme up Time for the snivel-parade Quick march 1 ’ 

He and the Military Policeman went in behind the others, arm-m-arm, with 
a dancing step-the policeman, till they got inside, wagging his fat behind m 
imitation of a pwe - dancer Flory sat down in the same pew as these two, 
opposite Elizabeth, on her right. It was the first time that he had ever risked 
sitting with his birthmark towards her ‘Shut your eyes and count twenty-five’ 
whispered Ellis as they sat down, drawing a snigger from the policeman Mrs 
Lackersteen had already taken her place at the harmonium, which was no 
bigger than a writing-desk Mattu stationed himself by the door and began to 
pull the punkah-it was so arranged that it only flapped over the front pews, 
where the Europeans sat Flo came nosing up the aisle, found Flory’s pew and 
settled down underneath it The service began 
Flory was only attending intermittently He was dimly aware of standing 
and kneeling and muttering ‘Amen’ to interminable prayers, and of Ellis 



240 Burmese Days 

nudging him and whispering blasphemies behind his hymn book But he was 
too happy to collect his thoughts Hell was yielding up Eurydice The yellow 
light flooded m through the open door, gilding the broad back of Mr 
Macgregor’s silk coat like cloth-of-gold Elizabeth, across the narrow aisle, 
was so close to Flory that he could hear every rustle of her dress and feel, as it 
seemed to him, the warmth of her body, yet he would not look at her even once, 
lest the others should notice it The harmonium quavered bronchitically as 
Mrs Lackersteen struggled to pump sufficient air into it with the sole pedal 
that worked The singing was a queer, ragged noise-an earnest booming from 
Mr Macgregor, a kind of shamefaced muttering from the other Europeans, 
and from the back a loud, wordless lowing, for the Karen Christians knew the 
tunes of the hymns but not the words 

They were kneeling down again ‘More bloody knee-drill,’ Ellis whispered 
The air darkened, and there was a light patter of ram on the roof, the trees 
outside rustled, and a cloud of yellow leaves whirled past the window Flory 
watched them through the chinks of his fingers Twenty years ago, on winter 
Sundays in his pew in the parish church at home, he used to watch the yellow 
leaves, as at this moment, drifting and fluttering against leaden skies Was it 
not possible, now, to begin over again as though those grimy years had never 
touched him? Through his fingers he glanced sidelong at Elizabeth, kneeling 
with her head bent and her face hidden m her youthful, mottled hands When 
they were married, when they were married' What fun they would have 
together m this alien yet kindly land' He saw Elizabeth m his camp, greeting 
him as he came home tired from work and Ko S’la hurried from the tent with a 
bottle of beer, he saw her walking in the forest with him, watching the 
hornbills in the peepul trees and picking nameless flowers, and in the marshy 
grazing-grounds, tramping through the cold-weather mist after snipe and teal 
He saw his home as she would remake it He saw his drawing-room, sluttish 
and bachelor-like no longer, with new furniture from Rangoon, and a bowl of 
pink balsams like rosebuds on the table, and books and water-colours and a 
black piano Above all the piano' His mind lingered upon the piano-symbol, 
perhaps because he was unmusical, of civilized and settled life He was 
delivered for ever from the sub-life of the past decade-the debaucheries, the 
lies, the pain of exile and solitude, the dealings with whores and money- 
lenders and pukka sahibs 

The clergyman stepped to the small wooden lectern that also served as a 
pulpit, slipped the band from a roll of sermon paper, coughed, and announced 
a text ‘In the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost Amen ’ 

‘Cut it short, for Christ’s sake,’ murmured Ellis 

Flory did not notice how many mmutes passed The words of the sermon 
flowed peacefully through his head, an indistinct burbling sound, almost 
unheard When they were married, he was still thinking, when they were 
married- 

Hullo' What was happening? 

The clergyman had stopped short m the middle of a word He had taken off 
his pineernez and was shaking them with a distressed air at someone m the 



Burmese Days 241 

doorway There was a fearful, raucous scream 
c Pike-san pay-hke f Pike-san pay-hke r 

Everyone jumped m their seats and turned round It was Ma Hla May As 
they turned she stepped inside the church and shoved old Mattu violently 
aside She shook her fist at Flory 

£ Pike-san pay -like 1 Pike-san pay-like f Yes, that’s the one I mean— Flory, 
Flory' (She pronounced it Porley ) That one sitting in front there, with the 
black hair' Turn round and face me, you coward' Where is the money you 
promised me?’ 

She was shrieking like a maniac The people gaped at her, too astounded to 
move or speak Her face was grey with powder, her greasy hair was tumbling 
down, her longyi was ragged at the bottom She looked like a screaming hag of 
the bazaar Flory’s bowels seemed to have turned to ice Oh God, God' Must 
they know-must Elizabeth know-that that was the woman who had been his 
mistress? But there was not a hope, not the vestige of a hope, of any mistake 
She had screamed his name over and over again Flo, hearing the familiar 
voice, wriggled from under the pew, walked down the aisle and wagged her tail 
at Ma Hla May The wretched woman was yelling out a detailed account of 
what Flory had done to her 

‘Look at me, you white men, and you women, too, look at me' Look how he 
has ruined me' Look at these rags I am wearing' And he is sitting there, the 
liar, the coward, pretending not to see me' He would let me starve at his gate 
like a pariah dog Ah, but I will shame you' Turn round and look at me' Look 
at this body that you have kissed a thousand times-look-look-’ 

She began actually to tear her clothes open-the last insult of a base-born 
Burmese woman The harmonium squeaked as Mrs Lackersteen made a 
convulsive movement People had at last found their wits and began to stir 
The clergyman, who had been bleating ineffectually, recovered his voice, 
‘Take that woman outside ' 5 he said sharply 
Flory’s face was ghastly After the first moment he had turned his head away 
from the door and set his teeth in a desperate effort to look unconcerned But it 
was useless, quite useless His face was as yellow as bone, and the sweat 
glistened on his forehead Francis and Samuel, doing perhaps the first useful 
deed of their lives, suddenly sprang from their pew, grabbed Ma Hla May by 
the arms and hauled her outside, still screaming 

It seemed very silent in the church when they had finally dragged her out of 
hearing The scene had been so violent, so squalid, that everyone was upset by 
it Even Ellis looked disgusted Flory could neither speak nor stir. He sat 
staring fixedly at the altar, his face rigid and so bloodless that the birth-mark 
seemed to glow upon it like a streak of blue paint Elizabeth glanced across the 
aisle at him, and her revulsion made her almost physically sick. She had not 
understood a word of what Ma Hla May was saying, but the meaning of the 
scene was perfectly clear The thought that he had been the lover of that grey- 
faced, maniacal creature made her shudder in her bones. But worse than that, 
worse than anything, was his ugliness at this moment His face appalled her, it 
was so ghastly, rigid and old. It was like a skull. Only the birthmark seemed 



242 Burmese Days 

alive in it She hated him now for his birthmark She had never known till this 
moment how dishonouring, how unforgivable a thing it was 
Like the crocodile, U Po Kym had struck at the weakest spot For, needless 
to say, this scene was U Po Kyin’s doing He had seen his chance, as usual, and 
tutored Ma Hla May for her part with considerable care The clergyman 
brought his sermon to an end almost at once As soon as it was over Flory 
hurried outside, not looking at any of the others It was getting dark, thank 
God At fifty yards from the church he halted, and watched the others making 
in couples for the Club It seemed to him that they were hurrying Ah, they 
would, of coursel There would be something to talk about at the Club tonight 1 
Flo rolled belly-upwards against his ankles, asking for a game ‘Get out, you 
bloody brute*’ he said, and kicked her Elizabeth had stopped at the church 
door Mr Macgregor, happy chance, seemed to be introducing her to the 
clergyman In a moment the two men went on in the direction of Mr 
Macgregor’s house, where the clergyman was to stay for the night, and 
Elizabeth followed the others, thirty yards behind them Flory ran after her 
and caught up with her almost at the Club gate 
‘Elizabeth*’ 

She looked round, saw him, turned white, and would have hurried on 
without a word But his anxiety was too great, and he caught her by the wrist 
‘Elizabeth* I must- I’ve got to speak to you*’ 

‘Let me go, will you*’ 

They began to struggle, and then stopped abruptly Two of the Karens who 
had come out of the church were standing fifty yards away, gazing at them 
through the half-darkness with deep interest Flory began again m a lower 
tone 

‘Elizabeth, I know I’ve no right to stop you like this But I must speak to 
you, I must* Please hear what I’ve got to say Please don’t run away from me*’ 
‘What are you doing 5 Why are you holding on to my arm 5 Let me go this 
instant*’ 

‘I’ll let you go-there, look* But do listen to me, please* Answer me this one 
thing After what’s happened, can you ever forgive me 5 ’ 

‘Forgive you 5 What do you mean } forgive you 5 ’ 

‘I know I’m disgraced It was the vilest thing to happen* Only, in a sense it 
wasn’t my fault You’ll see that when you’re calmer Do you thmk-not now, it 
was too bad, but later- do you think you can forget it?’ 

‘I really don’t know what you’re talking about Forget it 5 What has it got to 
do with me> I thought it was very disgusting, but it’s not my business I can’t 
think why you’re questiomng me like this at all ’ 

He almost despaired at that Her tone and even her words were the very 
ones she had used in that earlier quarrel of theirs It was the same move over 
again. Instead of hearing him out she was going to evade him and put him 
off-snub him by pretending that he had no claim upon her 
‘Elizabeth! Please answer me Please be fair to me* It’s serious this time I 
don’t expect you to take me back all at once You couldn’t, when I’m publicly 
disgraced like this But, after all, you virtually promised to marry me-’ 



Burmese Days 243 

‘What 1 Promised to marry you? When did I promise to marry >ou?’ 

‘Not in words, I know But it was understood between us ’ 

‘Nothing of the kind was understood between us' I think you are behaving in 
the most horrible way I’m going along to the Club at once Good evening' ’ 
‘Elizabeth' Elizabeth' Listen It’s not fair to condemn me unheard You 
knew before what I’d done, and you knew that I’d lived a different life since I 
met you What happened this evening was only an accident That wretched 
woman, who, I admit, was once my- well-’ 

‘I won’t listen, I won’t listen to such things' I’m going 1 ’ 

He caught her by the wrists again, and this time held her The Karens had 
disappeared, fortunately 

‘No, no, you shall hear me' I’d rather offend you to the heart than have this 
uncertainty It’s gone on week after week, month after month, and I’ve never 
once been able to speak straight out to you You don’t seem to know or care 
how much you make me suffer But this time you’ve got to answer me ’ 

She struggled m his grip, and she was surprisingly strong Her face was 
more bitterly angry than he had ever seen or imagined it She hated him so that 
she would have struck him if her hands were free 
‘Let me go' Oh, you beast, you beast, let me go' 5 

‘My God, my God, that we should fight like this' But what else can I do? I 
can’t let you go without even hearing me Elizabeth, you must listen to me 1 ’ 

‘I will not' I will not discuss it' What right have you to question me? Let me go 1 ’ 
‘Forgive me, forgive me' This one question Will you-not now, but later, 
when this vile business is forgotten-will you marry me?’ 

‘No, never, never'’ 

‘Don’t say it like that' Don’t make it final Say no for the present if you 
like-but in a month, a year, five years-’ 

‘Haven’t I said no? Why must you keep on and on?’ 

‘Elizabeth, listen to me I’ve tried again and again to tell you what you mean 
to me-oh, it’s so useless talking about it' But do try and understand Haven’t I 
told you something of the life we live here? The sort of horrible death-m- 
life' The decay, the loneliness, the self-pity? Try and realize what it means, 
and that you’re the sole person on earth who could save me from it ’ 

‘Will you let me go? Why do you have to make this dreadful scene?’ 

‘Does it mean nothing to you when I say that I love you? I don’t believe 
you’ve ever realized what it is that I want from you If you like, I’d marry you 
and promise never even touch you with my finger I wouldn’t mind even that, 
so long as you were with me But I can’t go on with my life alone, always alone 
Can’t you bring yourself ever to forgive me?’ 

‘Never, never' I wouldn’t marry you if you were the last man on earth I’d as 
soon marry the-the sweeper*’ 

She had begun crying now He saw that she meant what she said The tears 
came into his own eyes He said again* 

‘For the last time Remember that it’s something to have one person in the 
world who loves you Remember that though you’ll find men who are richer, 
and younger, and better in every way than I, you’ll never find one who cares 



244 Burmese Days 

for you so much And though I’m not rich, at least I could make you a home 
There’s a way of livmg-civilized, decent-’ 

‘Haven’t we said enough?’ she said more calmly ‘Will you let me go before 
somebody comes?’ 

He relaxed his grip on her wrists He had lost her, that was certain Like a 
hallucination, painfully clear, he saw again their home as he had imagined it, 
he saw their garden, and Elizabeth feeding Nero and the pigeons on the drive 
by the sulphur-yellow phloxes that grew as high as her shoulder, and the 
drawing-room, with the water-colours on the walls, and the balsams in the 
china bowl mirrored by the table, and the book-shelves, and the black piano 
The impossible, mythical piano- symbol of everything that that futile accident 
had wrecked 1 

‘You should have a piano,’ he said despairingly 
‘I don’t play the piano ’ 

He let her go It was no use continuing She was no sooner free of him than 
she took to her heels and actually ran into the Club garden, so hateful was his 
presence to her Among the trees she stopped to take off her spectacles and 
remove the signs of tears from her face Oh, the beast, the beast 1 He had hurt 
her wrists abominably Oh, what an unspeakable beast he was 1 When she 
thought of his face as it had looked in church, yellow and glistening with the 
hideous birthmark upon it, she could have wished him dead It was not what 
he had done that horrified her He might have committed a thousand 
abominations and she could have forgiven him But not after that shameful, 
squalid scene, and the devilish ugliness of his disfigured face in that moment 
It was, finally, the birthmark that had damned him 
Her aunt would be furious when she heard that she had refused Flory And 
there was her uncle and his leg-pmching-between the two of them, life here 
would become impossible Perhaps she would have to go Home unmarried 
after all Black beetles' No matter Anything- spinsterhood, drudgery, 
anything-sooner than the alternative Never, never, would she yield to a man 
who had been so disgraced' Death sooner, far sooner If there had been 
mercenary thoughts in her mind an hour ago, she had forgotten them She did 
not even remember that Verrall had jilted her and that to have married Flory 
would have saved her face She knew only that he was dishonoured and less 
than a man, and that she hated him as she would have hated a leper or a lunatic. 
The instinct was deeper than reason or even self-interest, and she could no 
more have disobeyed it than she could have stopped breathing 
Flory, as he turned up the hill, did not run, but he walked as fast as he could 
What he had to do must be done quickly It was getting very dark The 
wretched Flo, who even now had not grasped that anything serious was the 
matter, trotted close to his heels, whimpering m a self-pitymg manner to 
reproach him for the kick he had given her As he came up the path a wind blew 
through the plamtain trees*, rattling the tattered leaves and bringing a scent of 
damp It was going to ram again Ko S’la had laid the dinner-table and was 
removing some flying beetles that had committed suicide against the petrol- 
lamp .Evidently he had not heard about the scene in church yet 



Burmese Days 24 5 

‘The holy one’s dinner is ready Will the holy one dme now’’ 

‘No, not yet Give me that lamp ’ 

He took the lamp, went into the bedroom and shut the door, The stale scent 
of dust and cigarette-smoke met him, and m the white, unsteady glare of the 
lamp he could see the mildewed books and the lizards on the wall So he was 
back again to this-to the old, secret life-after everything, back where he had 
been before 

Was it not possible to endure it 1 He had endured it before There were 
palliatives-books, his garden, drink, work, whoring, shooting, conversations 
with the doctor 

No, it was not endurable any longer, Since Elizabeth’s coming the power to 
suffer and above all to hope, which he had thought dead m him, had sprung to 
new life The half-comfortable lethargy m which he had lived was broken And 
if he suffered now, there was far worse to come In a little while someone else 
would marry her How he could picture it-the moment when he heard the 
news 1 -‘Did you hear the Lackersteen kid’s got off at last’ Poor old So-and- 
so-booked for the altar, God help him,’ etc , etc And the casual question- ‘Oh, 
really’ When is it to be’’-stiffenmg one’s face, pretending to be uninterested 
And then her wedding day approaching, her bridal mght-ah, not that' 
Obscene, obscene Keep your eyes fixed on that Obscene He dragged his tm 
uniform-case from under the bed, took out his automatic pistol, slid a clip of 
cartridges into the magazine, and pulled one into the breech 

Ko S’la was remembered in his will There remained Flo He laid his pistol 
on the table and went outside Flo was playing with Ba Shm, Ko S’la’s 
youngest son, under the lee of the cookhouse, where the servants had left the 
remains of a woodfire She was dancing round him with her small teeth bared, 
pretending to bite him, while the tiny boy, his belly red m the glow of the 
embers, smacked weakly at her, laughing, and yet half frightened 

‘Flo* Come here, Flo 1 ’ 

She heard him and came obediently, and then stopped short at the bedroom 
door She seemed to have grasped now that there was something wrong She 
backed a little and stood looking timorously up at him, unwilling to enter the 
bedroom, 

‘Come in here 1 ’ 

She wagged her tail, but did not move 

‘Come on, Flo' Good old Flo! Come on 1 ’ 

Flo was suddenly stricken with terror She whined, her tail went down, and 
she shrank back ‘Come here, blast you’’ he cried, and he took her by the collar 
and flung her into the room, shutting the door behind her He went to the table 
for the pistol 

‘No come here r Do as you’re told*’ 

She crouched down and whined for forgiveness, It hurt him to hear it, 
‘Come on, old girl! Dear old Flo* Master wouldn’t hurt you. Come here*’ She 
crawled very slowly towards his feet, flat on her belly, whining, her head down 
as though afraid to look at him. When she was a yard away he fired, blowing 
her skull to fragments 



246 Burmese Days 

Her shattered brain looked like red velvet Was that what he would look like? 
The heart, then, not the head He could hear the servants running out of their 
quarters and shoutmg-they must have heard the sound of the shot He 
hurriedly tore open his coat and pressed the muzzle of the pistol against his 
shirt A tmy lizard, translucent like a creature of gelatine, was stalking a white 
moth along the edge of the table Flory pulled the trigger with his thumb 

As Ko S’la burst into the room, for a moment he saw nothing but the dead 
body of the dog Then he saw his master’s feet, heels upwards, projecting from 
beyond the bed He yelled to the others to keep the children out of the room, 
and all of them surged back from the doorway with screams Ko S’la fell on his 
knees behind Flory’ s body, at the same moment as Ba Pe came running 
through the veranda 

‘Has he shot himselP’ 

‘I think so Turn him over on his back Ah, look at that 1 Run for the Indian 
doctor 1 Run for your life 1 ’ 

There was a neat hole, no bigger than that made by a pencil passing through 
a sheet of blotting-paper, in Flory’ s shirt He was obviously quite dead With 
great difficulty Ko S’la managed to drag him on to the bed, for the other 
servants refused to touch the body It was only twenty minutes before the 
doctor arrived He had heard only a vague report that Flory was hurt, and had 
bicycled up the hill at top speed through a storm of rain He threw his bicycle 
down m the flower-bed and hurried m through the veranda He was out of 
breath, and could not see through his spectacles He took them off, peering 
myopically at the bed ‘What iss it, my friend?’ he said anxiously ‘Where are 
you hurt?’ Then, coming closer, he saw what was on the bed, and uttered a 
harsh sound 

‘Ach, what is this? What has happened to him?’ 

The doctor fell on his knees, tore Flory’ s shirt open and put his ear to his 
chest An expression of agony came into his face, and he seized the dead man 
by the shoulders and shook him as though mere violence could bring him to 
life One arm fell limply over the edge of the bed The doctor lifted it back 
again, and then, with the dead hand between his own, suddenly burst into 
tears Ko S’la was standing at the foot of the bed, his brown face full of lines 
The doctor stood up, and then losing control of himself for a moment, leaned 
against the bedpost and wept noisily and grotesquely his back turned on Ko 
S’la His fat shoulders were quivering Presently he recovered himself and 
turned round again 

‘How did this happen?’ 

‘We heard two shots. He did it himself, that is certain I do not know why ’ 

‘How did you know that he did it on purpose? How do you know that it was 
not an accident?’ 

For answer, Ko S’la pointed silently to Flo’s corpse The doctor thought for 
a moment, and then, with gentle, practised hands, swathed the dead man in the 
sheet and knotted it at foot and head With death, the birthmark had faded 
immediately, so that it was no more than a faint grey stain 

‘Bury the dog at once I will tell Mr Macgregor that this happened 



Burmese Days 247 

accidentally while he was cleaning his revolver Be sure that you bury the dog 
Your master was my friend It shall not be written on his tombstone that he 
committed suicide * 



It was lucky that the padre should have been at Kyauktada, for he was able, 
before catching the tram on the following evening, to read the burial service in 
due form and even to deliver a short address on the virtues of the dead man All 
Englishmen are virtuous when they are dead ‘Accidental death’ was the 
official verdict (Dr Veraswami had proved with all his medico-legal skill that 
the circumstances pointed to accident) and it was duly inscribed upon the 
tombstone Not that anyone believed it, of course Flory’s real epitaph was the 
remark, very occasionally uttered-for an Englishman who dies in Burma is so 
soon forgotten- ‘ Flory^ Oh yes, he was a dark chap, with a birthmark He shot 
himself in Kyauktada m 1926 Over a girl, people said Bloody fool ’ Probably 
no one, except Elizabeth, was much surprised at what had happened There is 
a rather large number of suicides among the Europeans m Burma, and they 
occasion very little surprise 

Flory’s death had several results The first and most important of them was 
that Dr Veraswami was ruined, even as he had foreseen The glory of being a 
white man’s friend- the one thing that had saved him before-had vanished 
Flory’s standing with the other Europeans had never been good, it is true, but 
he was after all a white man, and his friendship conferred a certain prestige 
Once he was dead, the doctor’s ruin was assured U Po Kym waited the 
necessary time, and then struck again, harder than ever It was barely three 
months before he had fixed it m the head of every European m Kyauktada that 
the doctor was an unmitigated scoundrel No public accusation was ever 
made against him-U Po Kym was most careful of that Even Ellis would have 
been puzzled to say just what scoundrelism the doctor had been guilty of, but 
still, it was agreed that he was a scoundrel By degrees, the general suspicion of 
him crystallized m a single Burmese phrase- ‘shok de? Veraswami, it was said, 
was quite a clever little chap in his way- quite a good doctor for a native- but he 
was thoroughly shok de Shok de means, approximately, untrustworthy, and 
when a ‘native’ official comes to be known as shok de, there is an end of him 

The dreaded nod and wink passed somewhere m high places, and the doctor 
was reverted to the rank of Assistant Surgeon and transferred to Mandalay 
General Hospital He is still there, and is likely to remain, Mandalay is rather a 
disagreeable town-it is dusty and intolerably hot, and it is said to have five 
mam products all beginning with ,P, namely, pagodas, panahs, pigs, priests 
and prostitqtes-and the routine-work of the hospital is a dreary business. The 
doctor lives just outside the hospital, grounds m a little bake-house of a 
bungalow with a corrugated iron fence round its tiny compound, and in the 
evenings he runs a private clinic to supplement, his reduced pay He has joined 



248 Burmese Days 

a second-rate club frequented by Indian pleaders Its chief glory is a single 
European member-a Glasgow electrician named Macdougall, sacked from the 
Irrawaddy Flotilla Company for drunkenness, and now making a precarious 
living out of a garage Macdougall is a dull lout, only interested in whisky and 
magnetos The doctor, who will never believe that a white man can be a fool, 
tries almost every night to engage him m what he still calls ‘cultured 
conversation’, but the results are very unsatisfying 
Ko S’la inherited four hundred rupees under Flory’s will, and with his 
family he set up a tea-shop m the bazaar But the shop failed, as it was bound to 
do with the two women fighting in it at all hours, and Ko S’la and Ba Pe were 
obliged to go back to service Ko S’la was an accomplished servant Besides the 
useful arts of pimping, dealing with money-lenders, carrying master to bed 
when drunk and making pick-me-ups known as prairie oysters on the 
following morning, he could sew, darn, refill cartridges, attend to a horse, 
press a suit, and decorate a dinner-table with wonderful, intricate patterns of 
chopped leaves and dyed rice-grams He was worth fifty rupees a month But 
he and Ba Pe had fallen into lazy ways in Flory’s service, and they were sacked 
from one job after another They had a bad year of poverty, and little Ba Shm 
developed a cough, and finally coughed himself to death one stifling hot- 
weather night Ko S’la is now a second boy to a Rangoon rice-broker with a 
neurotic wife who makes unending kit-kit, and Ba Pe is pani-wallah m the 
same house at sixteen rupees a month Ma Hla May is in a brothel in 
Mandalay Her good looks are all but gone, and her clients pay her only four 
annas and sometimes kick her and beat her. Perhaps more bitterly than any of 
the others, she regrets the good time when Flory was alive, and when she had 
not the wisdom to put aside any of the money she extracted from him 

U Po Kyin realized all his dreams except one After the doctor’s disgrace, it 
was inevitable that U Po Kyin should be elected to the Club, and elected he 
was, in spite of bitter protests from Ellis In the end the other Europeans came 
to be rather glad that they had elected him, for he was a bearable addition to the 
Club He did not come too often, was ingratiating in his manner, stood drinks 
freely, and developed almost at once into a brilliant bridge-player A few 
months later he was transferred from Kyauktada and promoted For a whole 
year, before his retirement, he officiated as Deputy Commissioner, and 
during that year alone he made twenty thousand rupees in bribes A month 
after his retirement he was summoned to a durbar m Rangoon, to receive the 
decoration that had been awarded to him by the Indian Government 
It was an impressive scene, that durbar On the platform, hung with flags 
and flowers, sat the Governor, frock-coated, upon a species of throne, with a 
bevy of aides-de-camp and secretaries behind him All round the hall, like 
glittering waxworks, stood the tall, bearded sowars of the Governor’s 
bodyguard, with pennoned lances in their hands. Outside, a band was blaring 
at intervals The gallery was gay with the white mgyts and pmk scarves of 
Burmese ladies, and m the body of the hall a hundred men or more were 
waiting to receive their decorations There were Burmese officials in blazing 
Mandalay pa$os 3 and Indians m doth-of-gold p^grtS, and British officers in 



Burmese Days 249 

full-dress uniform with clanking sword-scabbards, and old thugyis with their 
grey hair knotted behind their heads and silver-hilted dahs slung from their 
shoulders In a high, clear voice a secretary was reading out the list of awards, 
which varied from the C I E to certificates of honour in embossed silver cases 
Presently U Po Kyin’s turn came and the secretary read from his scroll 
To U Po Kym, Deputy Assistant Commissioner, retired, for long and loyal 
service and especially for his timely aid in crushing a most dangerous rebellion 
in Kyauktada district 5 -and so on and so on 
Then two henchmen, placed there for the purpose hoisted U Po Kyin 
upright, and he waddled to the platform, bowed as low as his belly would 
permit, and was duly decorated and felicitated, while Ma Km and other 
supporters clapped wildly and fluttered their scarves from the gallery 
U Po Kym had done all that mortal man could do It was time now to be 
making ready for the next world-m short, to begin building pagodas But 
unfortunately, this was the very point at which his plans went wrong Only 
three days after the Governor’s durbar, before so much as a brick of those 
atoning pagodas had been laid, U Po Kym wa stricken with apoplexy and died 
without speaking again There is no armour against fate Ma Km was 
heartbroken at the disaster Even if she had built the pagodas herself, it would 
have availed U Po Kym nothing, no merit can be acquired save by one’s own 
act She suffers greatly to think of U Po Kym where he must be 
now-wandering m God knows what dreadful subterranean hell of fire, and 
darkness, and serpents, and genu Or even if he has escaped the worst, his 
other fear has been realized, and he has returned to the earth in the shape of a 
rat or a frog Perhaps at this very moment a snake is devouring him 
As to Elizabeth, things fell out better than she had expected After Flory’s 
death Mrs Lackersteen, dropping all pretences for once, said openly that there 
were no men m this dreadful place and the only hope was to go and stay several 
months in Rangoon or Maymyo But she could not very well send Elizabeth to 
Rangoon or Maymyo alone, and to go with her practically meant condemning 
Mr Lackersteen to death from delirium tremens Months passed, and the rams 
reached their climax, and Elizabeth had just made up her mind that she must 
go home after all, penniless and unmarried, when-Mr Macgregor proposed to 
her He had had it in his mind for a long time, indeed, he had only been waiting 
for a decent interval to elapse after Flory’s death 

Elizabeth accepted him gladly. He was rather old, perhaps, but a Deputy 
Commissioner is not to be despised-certainly he was a far better match than 
Flory. They are very happy Mr Macgregor was always a good-hearted man, 
but he has grown more human and likeable since his marriage His voice booms 
less, and he has given up his morning exercises Elizabeth has grown mature 
surprisingly quickly, and a certain hardness of manner that always belonged to 
her has become accentuated. Her servants live in terror of her, though she 
speaks no Burmese. She has an exhaustive knowledge of the Civil List, gives 
charming little dinner-parties and knows how to put the wives of subordinate 
officials in their places-in short, she fills with complete success the position for 
which Nature had designed her from the first, that of a hurra memsahib 





CHAPTER I 


I 


As the alarm clock on the chest of drawers exploded like a horrid little bomb of 
bell metal, Dorothy, wrenched from the depths of some complex, troubling 
dream, awoke with a start and lay on her back looking mto the darkness m 
extreme exhaustion 

The alarm clock continued its nagging, feminine clamour, which would go 
on for five minutes or thereabouts if you did not stop it Dorothy was aching 
from head to foot, and an insidious and contemptible self-pity, which usually 
seized upon her when it was time to get up m the morning, caused her to bury 
her head under the bedclothes and try to shut the hateful noise out of her ears 
She struggled against her fatigue, however, and, according to her custom, 
exhorted herself sharply in the second person plural Come on, Dorothy, up 
you get 1 No snoozing, please 1 Proverbs vi, 9 Then she remembered that if the 
noise went on any longer it would wake her father, and with a hurried 
movement she bounded out of bed, seized the clock from the chest of drawers, 
and turned off the alarm It was kept on the chest of drawers precisely in order 
that she should have to get out of bed to .silence it Still m darkness, she knelt 
down at her bedside and repeated the Lord’s Prayer, but rather distractedly, 
her feet being troubled by the cold 

It was just half past five, and coldish for an August morning Dorothy (her 
name was Dorothy Hare, and she was the only child of the Reverend Charles 
Hare, Rector of St Athelstan’s, Knype Hill, Suffolk) put on her aged 
flannelette dressing-gown and felt her way downstairs There was a chill 
morning smell of dust, damp plaster, and the fried dabs from yesterday’s 
supper, and from either side of the passage on the second floor she could hear 
the antiphonal snoring of her father and of Ellen, the maid of all work With 
care-for the kitchen table had a nasty trick of reaching out of the darkness and 
banging you on the hip-bone-Dorothy felt her way into the kitchen, lighted 
the candle on the mantelpiece, and, still aching with fatigue, knelt down and 
raked the ashes out of the range 

The kitchen fire was a ‘beast’ to light The chimney was crooked and there- 
fore perpetually half choked, and the fire, before it would light, expected to be 
dosed with a cupful of kerosene, like a drunkard’s morning nip of gin Having 
set the kettle to boil for her father’s shaving-water, Dorothy went upstairs and 
turned on her bath. Ellen was still snoring, with heavy youthful snores She 
was a good hard-working servant once she was awake, but she was one of 
those girls whom the Devil and all his angels cannot get out of bed before 



A Clergyman’ s Daughter 


256 

seven in the morning 
Dorothy filled the bath as slowly as possible-the splashing always woke her 
father if she turned on the tap too fast- and stood for a moment regarding the 
pale, unappetizing pool of water Her body had gone goose-flesh all over She 
detested cold baths, it was for that very reason that she made it a rule to take all 
her baths cold from April to November Putting a tentative hand into the 
water-and it was horribly cold- she drove herself forward with her usual 
exhortations Come on, Dorothy! i n you go' No funking, please' Then she 
stepped resolutely into the bath, sat down and let the icy girdle of water 
slide up her body and immerse her all except her hair, which she had twisted 
up behind her head The next moment she came to the surface gasping and 
wriggling, and had no sooner got her breath back than she remembered her 
‘memo list 5 , which she had brought down in her dressing-gown pocket and 
intended to read She reached out for it, and, leaning over the side of the bath, 
waist deep m icy water, read through the ‘memo list 5 by the light of the candle 
on the chair 
It ran 

70c HC 

Mrs T baby? Must visit 

Breakfast Bacon Must ask father money (P) 

Ask Ellen what stuff kitchen father’s tonic nb to ask about stuff for curtains 
at Solepipe’s 

Visiting call on Mrs P cutting from Daily M angelica tea good for 
rheumatism Mrs L’s cornplaster 

12 oc Rehearsal Charles I nb to order £lb glue 1 pot aluminium paint 
Dinner (crossed out) Luncheon ? 

Take round Parish Mag nb Mrs F owes 3/6d 
4 30 pm Mothers 5 TJ tea don’t forget 2\ yards casement cloth 
Flowers for church nb i tm Brasso 
Supper Scrambled eggs 

Type Father’s sermon what about new ribbon typewriter? 
nb to fork between peas bindweed awful 

Dorothy got out of her bath, and as she dried herself with a towel hardly 
bigger than a table napkm-they could never afford decent-sized towels at the 
Rectory-her hair came unpinned and fell down over her collar-bones in two 
heavy strands It was thick, fine, exceedingly pale hair, and it was perhaps as 
well that her father had forbidden her to bob it, for it was her only positive 
beauty. For the rest, she was a girl of middle height, rather thin, but strong and 
shapely, and her face was her weak point It was a thin, blonde, unremarkable 
kind of face, with pale eyes and a nose just a shade too long, if you looked 
closely you could see crow’s feet round the eyes, and the mouth, when it was in 
repose, looked tired. Not definitely a spmstensh face as yet, but it certainly 
would be so in a few years’ time Nevertheless, strangers commonly took her to 
be several years younger than her real age (she was not quite twenty-eight) 



A Clergymans Daughter 257 

because of the expression of almost childish earnestness in her eyes Her left 
forearm was spotted with tiny red marks like insect bites 

Dorothy put on her nightdress again and cleaned her teeth-plam water, of 
course, better not to use toothpaste before H C After all, either you are fasting 
or you aren’t The R C s are quite right there-and, even as she did so, 
suddenly faltered and stopped She put her toothbrush down A deadly pang, 
an actual physical pang, had gone through her viscera 

She had remembered, with the ugly shock with which one remembers 
something disagreeable for the first time m the morning, the bill at Cargill’s, 
the butcher’s, which had been owing for seven months That dreadful bill— it 
might be nineteen pounds or even twenty, and there was hardly the remotest 
hope of paying it- was one of the chief torments of her life At all hours of the 
night or day it was waiting just round the corner of her consciousness, ready to 
spring upon her and agonize her, and with it came the memory of a score of 
lesser bills, mounting up to a figure of which she dared not even think Almost 
involuntarily she began to pray, ‘Please God, let not Cargill send in his bill 
again today 1 ’ but the next moment she decided that this prayer was worldly 
and blasphemous, and she asked forgiveness for it Then she put on her 
dressing-gown and ran down to the kitchen in hopes of putting the bill out of 
mind 

The fire had gone out, as usual Dorothy relaid it, dirtying her hands with 
coal-dust, dosed it afresh with kerosene and hung about anxiously until the 
kettle boiled Father expected his shaving-water to be ready at a quarter past 
six Just seven minutes late, Dorothy took the can upstairs and knocked at her 
father’s door 

‘Come m, come in 1 ’ said a muffled, irritable voice 

The room, heavily curtained, was stuffy, with a masculine smell The Rector 
had lighted the candle on his bed-table, and was lying on his side, looking at his 
gold watch, which he had just drawn from beneath his pillow His hair was as 
white and thick as thistledown One dark bright eye glanced irritably over his 
shoulder at Dorothy 

‘Good morning, father ’ 

‘I do wish, Dorothy,’ said the Rector mdistinctly-his voice always sounded 
muffled and senile until he put his false teeth m-‘yau would make some effort 
to get Ellen out of bed m the mornings Or else be a little more punctual 
yourself ’ 

‘I’m so sorry. Father The kitchen fire kept going out ’ 

‘Very well 1 Put it down on the dressing-table Put it down and draw those 
curtains ’ 

It was daylight now, but a dull, clouded morning Dorothy hastened up to 
her room and dressed herself with the lightning speed which she found neces- 
sary six mornings out of seven There was only a tiny square of mirror m the 
room, and even that she did not use She simply hung her gold cross about her 
neck-plain gold cross, no crucifixes, please'-twisted her hair into a knot 
behind, stuck a number of hairpins rather sketchily into it, and threw her 
clothes (grey jersey, threadbare Irish tweed epat and skirt, stockings not quite 



2 $8 A Clergyman's Daughter 

matching the coat and skirt, and much- worn brown shoes) on to herself in the 
space of about three minutes She had got to e do out’ the dmmg-room and her 
father’s study before church, besides saying her prayers m preparation for 
Holy Communion, which took her not less than twenty minutes 

When she wheeled her bicycle out of the front gate the morning was still 
overcast, and the grass sodden with heavy dew Through the mist that 
wreathed the hillside St Athelstan’s Church loomed dimly, like a leaden 
sphinx, its single bell tolling funereally boom! boom' boom' Only one of the 
bells was now m active use, the other seven had been unswung from their cage 
and had lam silent these three years past, slowly splintering the floor of the 
belfry beneath their weight In the distance, from the mists below, you could 
hear the offensive clatter of the bell in the R C church -a nasty, cheap, tinny 
little thing which the Rector of St Athelstan’s used to compare with a muffin- 
bell 

Dorothy mounted her bicycle and rode swiftly up the hill, leaning over her 
handlebars The bridge of her thin nose was pink in the morning cold A 
redshank whistled overhead, invisible against the clouded sky Early in the 
morning my song shall rise to Thee' Dorothy propped her bicycle against the 
lychgate, and, finding her hands still grey with coal-dust, knelt down and 
scrubbed them clean m the long wet grass between the graves Then the bell 
stopped ringing, and she jumped up and hastened into church, just as 
Proggett, the sexton, in ragged cassock and vast labourer’s boots, was 
clumping up the aisle to take his place at the side altar 

The church was very cold, with a scent of candle-wax and ancient dust It 
was a large church, much too large for its congregation, and ruinous and more 
than half empty The three narrow islands of pews stretched barely half-way 
down the nave, and beyond them were great wastes of bare stone floor in which 
a few worn inscriptions marked the sites of ancient graves The roof over the 
chancel was sagging visibly, beside the Church Expenses box two fragments of 
riddled beam explained mutely that this was due to that mortal foe of 
Christendom, the death-watch beetle The light filtered, pale-coloured, 
through windows of anaemic glass Through the open south door you could 
see a ragged cypress and the boughs of a lime-tree, greyish m the sunless air 
and swaying faintly 

As usual, there was only one other communicant-old Miss Mayfill, of The 
Grange The attendance at Holy Communion was so bad that the Rector could 
not even get any boys to serve him, except on Sunday mornings, when the boys 
liked showmg off m front of the congregation m their cassocks and surplices 
Dorothy went into the pew behind Miss Mayfill, and, m penance for some sm 
of yesterday, pushed away the hassock and knelt on the bare stones The 
service was beginning The Rector, m cassock and short linen surplice, was 
reciting the prayers in a swift practised voice, clear enough now that his teeth 
were in, and curiously ungemal In his fastidious, aged face, pale as a silver 
com, there was an expression of aloofness, almost of contempt ‘This is a valid 
sacrament,’ he seemed to be saying, ‘and it is my duty to administer it to you 
But remember that I am only your priest, not your friend As a human being I 



A Clergyman's Daughter 259 

dislike you and despise you ’ Proggett, the sexton, a man of forty with curly 
grey hair and a red, harassed face, stood patiently by, uncomprehending but 
reverent, fiddling with the little communion bell which was lost m his huge red 
hands 

Dorothy pressed her fingers against her eyes She had not yet succeeded m 
concentrating her thoughts-mdeed, the memory of Cargill’s bill was still 
worrying her intermittently The prayers, which she knew by heart, were 
flowing through her head unheeded She raised her eyes for a moment, and 
they began immediately to stray First upwards, to the headless roof-angels on 
whose necks you could still see the sawcuts of the Puritan soldiers, then back 
again, to Miss Mayfill’s black, quasi-pork-pie hat and tremulous jet ear-rings 
Miss Mayfill wore a long musty black overcoat, with a little collar of greasy- 
lookmg astrakhan, which had been the same ever since Dorothy could 
remember It was of some very peculiar stuff, like watered silk but coarser, 
with rivulets of black piping wandering all over it in no discoverable pattern It 
might even have been that legendary and proverbial substance, black 
bombazine Miss Mayfill was very old, so old that no one remembered her as 
anything but an old woman A faint scent radiated from her-an ethereal scent, 
analysable as eau-de-Cologne, mothballs, and a sub-flavour of gin 

Dorothy drew a long glass-headed pm from the lapel of her coat, and 
furtively, under cover of Miss Mayfill’s back, pressed the point against her 
forearm Her flesh tingled apprehensively She made it a rule, whenever she 
caught herself not attending to her prayers, to prick her arm hard enough to 
make blood come It was her chosen form of self-discipline, her guard against 
irreverence and sacrilegious thoughts 

With the pm poised in readiness she managed for several moments to pray 
more collectedly Her father had turned one dark eye disapprovingly upon 
Miss Mayfill, who was crossing herself at intervals, a practice he disliked A 
starling chattered outside With a shock Dorothy discovered that she was 
looking vamgloriously at the pleats of her father’s surplice, which she herself 
had sewn two years ago She set her teeth and drove the pm an eighth of an 
inch into her arm 

They were kneeling again It was the General Confession Dorothy recalled 
her eyfes-- wandering, alasl yet again, this time to the stained-glass window on 
her right, designed by Sir Warde Tooke, ar a, in 1851 and representing St 
Athelstan’s welcome at the gate of Heaven by Gabriel and a legion of angels all 
remarkably like one another and the Prince Consort-and pressed the pinpoint 
against a different part of her arm She began to meditate conscientiously upon 
the meaning of each phrase of the prayer, and so brought her mind back to a 
more attentive state But even so she was all but obliged to use the pm again 
when Proggett tinkled the bell m the middle of ‘Therefore with Angels and 
Archangels’ -being visited, as always, by a dreadful temptation to begin 
laughing at that passage. It was because of a story her father had told her once, 
of how when he was a little boy, and serving the priest at the altar, the 
communion bell had a screw-on dapper, which had come loose; and so the 
priest had said ‘Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and with aU the 



260 A Clergyman' s Daughter 

company of Heaven, we laud and magnify Thy glorious name, evermore 
praising Thee, and saying. Screw it up, you little fat-head, screw it up'* 

As the Rector finished the consecration Miss Mayfill began to struggle to her 
feet with extreme difficulty and slowness, like some disjointed wooden 
creature picking itself up by sections, and disengaging at each movement a 
powerful whiff of mothballs There was an extraordinary creaking sound- 
from her stays, presumably, but it was a noise as of bones grating against one 
another You could have imagined that there was only a dry skeleton inside 
that black overcoat 

Dorothy remained on her feet a moment longer Miss Mayfill was creeping 
towards the altar with slow, tottering steps She could barely walk, but she 
took bitter offence if you offered to help her In her ancient, bloodless face her 
mouth was surprisingly large, loose, and wet The underlip, pendulous with 
age, slobbered forward, exposing a strip of gum and a row of false teeth as 
yellow as the keys of an old piano On the upper lip was a fringe of dark, dewy 
moustache It was not an appetizing mouth, not the kind of mouth that you 
would like to see drinking out of your cup Suddenly, spontaneously, as 
though the Devil himself had put it there, the prayer slipped from Dorothy’s 
lips O God, let me not have to take the chalice after Miss Mayfill 1 

The next moment, in self-horror, she grasped the meaning of what she had 
said, and wished that she had bitten her tongue m two rather than utter that 
deadly blasphemy upon the altar steps She drew the pm again from her lapel 
and drove it into her arm so hard that it was all she could do to suppress a cry of 
pam Then she stepped to the altar and knelt down meekly on Miss Mayfill’ s 
left, so as to make quite sure of taking the chalice after her 

Kneeling, with head bent and hands clasped against her knees, she set 
herself swiftly to pray for forgiveness before her father should reach her with 
the wafer But the current of her thoughts had been broken Suddenly it was 
quite useless attempting to pray, her lips moved, but there was neither heart 
nor meaning in her prayers She could hear Proggett’s boots shuffling and her 
father’s clear low voice murmuring ‘Take and eat’, she could see the worn strip 
of red carpet beneath her knees, she could smell dust and eau-de-Cologne and 
mothballs, but of the Body and Blood of Christ, of the purpose for which she 
had come here, she was as though deprived of the power to think A deadly 
blankness had descended upon her mind It seemed to her that actually she 
could not pray She struggled, collected her thoughts, uttered mechanically the 
opening phrases of a prayer, but they were useless, meaningless-nothing but 
the dead shells of words Her father was holding the wafer before her in his 
shapely, aged hand He held it between finger and thumb, fastidiously, 
somehow distastefully, as though it had been a spoon of medicine His eye was 
upon Miss Mayfill, who was doubling herself up like a geometrid caterpillar, 
with many creakmgs and crossing herself so elaborately that one might have 
imagined that she was sketching a series of braid frogs on the front of her coat 
For several seconds Dorothy hesitated and did not take the wafer She dared 
not take it Better, far better to step down from the altar than to accept the 
sacrament with such chaos m her heart* 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 261 

Then it happened that she glanced sidelong, through the open south door A 
momentary spear of sunlight had pierced the clouds It struck downwards 
through the leaves of the limes, and a spray of leaves m the doorway gleamed 
with a transient, matchless green, greener than jade or emerald or Atlantic 
waters It was as though some jewel of unimaginable splendour had flashed for 
an instant, filling the doorway with green light, and then faded A flood of joy 
ran through Dorothy’s heart The flash of living colour had brought back to 
her, by a process deeper than reason, her peace of mmd, her love of God, her 
power to worship Somehow, because of the greenness of the leaves, it was 
again possible to pray O all ye green things upon the earth, praise ye the Lord' 
She began to pray, ardently, joyfully, thankfully The wafer melted upon her 
tongue She took the chalice from her father, and tasted with repulsion, even 
with an added joy in this small act of self-abasement, the wet imprint of Miss 
Mayfill’s lips on its silver rim 


2 


St Athelstan’s Church stood at the highest point of Knype Hill, and if you 
chose to climb the tower you could see ten miles or so across the surrounding 
country Not that there was anything worth looking at-only the low, barely 
undulating East Anglian landscape, intolerably dull in summer, but re- 
deemed m winter by the recurring patterns of the elms, naked and fanshaped 
against leaden skies 

Immediately below you lay the town, with the High Street running east and 
west and dividing unequally The southern section of the town was the 
ancient, agricultural, and respectable section On the northern side were the 
buildings of the Blifil-Gordon sugar-beet refinery, and all round and leading 
up to them were higgledy-piggledly rows of vile yellow brick cottages, mostly 
inhabited by the employees of the factory The factory employees, who made 
up more than half of the town’s two thousand inhabitants, were newcomers, 
townfolk, and godless almost to a man 

The two pivots, or foci, about which the social life of the town moved were 
Knype Hill Conservative Club (fully licensed), from whose bow window, any 
time after the bar was open, the large, rosy-gilled faces of the town’s 61ite were 
to be seen gazing like chubby goldfish from an aquarium pane, and Ye Olde 
Tea Shoppe, a little farther down the High Street, the principal rendezvous of 
the Knype Hill ladies Not to be present at Ye Olde Tea Shoppe between ten 
and eleven every morning, to drink your ‘morning coffee 5 and spend your half- 
hour or so in that agreeable twitter of upper-middle-class voices (‘My dear, he 
had nine spades to the ace-queen and he went one no trump, if you please 
What, my dear, you don’t mean to say you’re paying for my coffee agamt Oh, 



262 A Clergyman’ s Daughter 

but my dear, it is simply too sweet of you 1 Now tomorrow I shall simply insist 
upon paying for yours And just look at dear little Toto sitting up and looking 
such a clever little man with his little black nose wiggling, and he would, would 
he, the darling duck, he would, he would, and his mother would give him a 
lump of sugar, she would, she would There , Toto' 5 ), was to be definitely out of 
Knype Hill society The Rector in his acid way nicknamed these ladies ‘the 
coffee brigade* Close to the colony of sham-picturesque villas inhabited by 
the coffee brigade, but cut off from them by its larger grounds, was The 
Grange, Miss Mayfill’s house It was a curious, machicolated, imitation castle 
of dark red brick- somebody’s Folly, built about 1870-and fortunately almost 
hidden among dense shrubberies 

The Rectory stood half way up the hill, with its face to the church and its 
back to the High Street It was a house of the wrong age, inconveniently large, 
and faced with chronically peeling yellow plaster Some earlier Rector had 
added, at one side, a large greenhouse which Dorothy used as a workroom, but 
which was constantly out of repair The front garden was choked with ragged 
fir-trees and a great spreading ash which shadowed the front rooms and made 
it impossible to grow any flowers There was a large vegetable garden at the 
back Proggett did the heavy digging of the garden in the spring and autumn, 
and Dorothy did the sowing, planting, and weeding in such spare time as she 
could command, in spite of which the vegetable garden was usually an 
impenetrable jungle of weeds 

Dorothy jumped off her bicycle at the front gate, upon which some officious 
person had stuck a poster inscribed ‘Vote for Bhfil-Gordon and Higher 
Wages 1 ’ (There was a by-election going on, and Mr Blifil-Gordon was 
standing in the Conservative interest ) As Dorothy opened the front door she 
saw two letters lying on the worn coconut mat One was from the Rural Dean, 
and the other was a nasty, thm-looking letter from Catkin & Palm, her father’s 
clerical tailors It was a bill undoubtedly The Rector had followed his usual 
practice of collecting the letters that interested him and leaving the others 
Dorothy was just bending down to pick up the letters, when she saw, with a 
horrid shock of dismay, an unstamped envelope sticking to the letter-flap 

It was a bill-for certain it was a bill 1 Moreover, as soon as she set eyes on it 
she ‘knew’ that it was that horrible bill from Cargill’s, the butcher’s A sinking 
feeling passed through her entrails For a moment she actually began to pray 
that it might not be Cargill’s bill-that it might only be the bill for three and 
nine from Solepipe’s, the draper’s, or the bill from the International or the 
baker’s or the dairy-anythmg except Cargill’s bill 1 Then, mastering her pamc, 
she took the envelope from the letter-flap and tore it open with a convulsive 
movement 

‘To account rendered. £ 21 7s 9d ’ 

This was written m the innocuous handwriting of Mr Cargill’s accountant- 
But underneath, in thick, accusing-looking letters, was added and heavily 
underlined ‘Shd like to bring to your notice that this bill has been owing a 
very long time The earliest possible settlement will oblige, S Cargill ’ 

Dorothy had turned a shade paler, and was conscious of not wanting any 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 26 3 

breakfast She thrust the bill into her pocket and went into the dining-room It 
was a smallish, dark room, badly m need of repapering, and, like every other 
room m the Rectory, it had the air of having been furnished from the 
sweepings of an antique shop The furniture was ‘good 5 , but battered beyond 
repair, and the chairs were so worm-eaten that you could only sit on them in 
safety if you knew their individual foibles There were old, dark, defaced steel 
engravings hanging on the walls, one of them-an engraving of Van Dyck’s 
portrait of Charles I -probably of some value if it had not been ruined by 
damp 

The Rector was standing before the empty grate, warming himself at an 
imaginary fire and reading a letter that came from a long blue envelope He was 
still wearing his cassock of black watered silk, which set off to perfection his 
thick white hair and his pale, fine, none too amiable face As Dorothy came m 
he laid the letter aside, drew out his gold watch and scrutinized it significantly 
Tm afraid I’m a bit late, Father ’ 

‘Yes, Dorothy, you are a bit late,’ said the Rector, repeating her words with 
delicate but marked emphasis ‘You are twelve minutes late, to be exact Don’t 
you think, Dorothy, that when I have to get up at a quarter past six to celebrate 
Holy Communion, and come home exceedingly tired and hungry, it would be 
better if you could manage to come to breakfast without being a bit late ?’ 

It was clear that the Rector was m what Dorothy called, euphemistically, his 
‘uncomfortable mood’ He had one of those weary, cultivated voices which are 
never definitely angry and never anywhere near good humour-one of those 
voices which seem all the while to be saying, ‘I really cannot see what you are 
making all this fuss about 1 ’ The impression he gave was of suffering 
perpetually from other people’s stupidity and tiresomeness 

‘I’m so sorry, Father 1 I simply had to go and ask after Mrs Tawney ’ (Mrs 
Tawney was the ‘Mrs T’ of the ‘memo list’ ) ‘Her baby was born last night, and 
you know she promised me she’d come and be churched after it was born But 
of course she won’t if she thinks we aren’t taking any interest m her You know 
what these women are-they seem so to hate bemg churched They’ll never 
come unless I coax them into it ’ 

The Rector did not actually grunt, but he uttered a small dissatisfied sound 
as he moved towards the breakfast table, It was intended to mean, first, that it 
was Mr£ Tawney’s duty to come and be churched without Dorothy’s coaxing, 
secondly, that Dorothy had no business to waste her time visiting all the riff- 
raff of the town, especially before breakfast Mrs T awney was a labourer’s wife 
and lived in partibus mfidelium, north of the High Street The Rector laid his 
hand on the back of his chair, and, without speaking, cast Dorothy a glance 
which meant ‘Are we ready now ? Or are there to be any more delays?’ 

‘I think everything’s here, Father,’ said Dorothy ‘Perhaps if you’d just say 
grace-’ 

‘Benedictus benedicat/ said the Rector, lifting the worn silver coverlet oft the 
breakfast dish The silver coverlet, like the silver-gilt marmalade spoon, was a 
family heirloom, the knives and forks, and most of the crockery, came from 
Woolworths ‘Bacon again, I see,’ the Rector added, eyeing the three minute 



264 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

rashers that lay curled up on squares of fried bread 

‘It’s all we’ve got m the house, I’m afraid,’ Dorothy said 
The Rector picked up his fork between finger and thumb, and with a very 
delicate movement, as though playing at spillikins, turned one of the rashers 
over 

‘I know, of course, 5 he said, ‘that bacon for breakfast is an English 
institution almost as old as parliamentary government But still, don’t you 
think we might occasionally have a change, Dorothy?’ 

‘Bacon’s so cheap now,’ said Dorothy regretfully ‘It seems a sin not to buy 
it This was only fivepence a pound, and I saw some quite decent-looking 
bacon as low as threepence ’ 

‘Ah, Danish, I suppose? What a variety of Danish invasions we have had m 
this country! First with fire and sword, and now with their abominable cheap 
bacon Which has been responsible for the more deaths, I wonder?’ 

Feeling a little better after this witticism, the Rector settled himself m his 
chair and made a fairly good breakfast off the despised bacon, while Dorothy 
(she was not having any bacon this mornmg-a penance she had set herself 
yesterday for saying ‘Damn’ and idling for half an hour after lunch) meditated 
upon a good conversational opening 

There was an unspeakably hateful job in front of her-a demand for money 
At the very best of times getting money out of her father was next door to 
impossible, and it was obvious that this morning he was going to be even more 
‘difficult’ than usual ‘Difficult’ was another of her euphemisms He’s had bad 
news, I suppose, she thought despondently, looking at the blue envelope 
Probably no one who had ever spoken to the Rector for as long as ten 
minutes would have denied that he was a ‘difficult’ kind of man The secret of 
his almost unfailing ill humour really lay in the fact that he was an 
anachronism He ought never to have been born into the modern world, its 
whole atmosphere disgusted and infuriated him A couple of centuries earlier, 
a happy pluralist writing poems or collecting fossils while curates at £40 a year 
administered his parishes, he would have been perfectly at home Even now, if 
he had been a richer man, he might have consoled himself by shutting the 
twentieth century out of his consciousness But to live m past ages is very 
expensive, you can’t do it on less than two thousand a year The Rector, 
tethered by his poverty to the age of Lenin and the Daily Mail , was kept in a 
state of chrome exasperation which it was only natural that he should work off 
on the person nearest to him-usually, that is, on Dorothy 
He had been born m 1871, the younger son of the younger son of a baronet, 
and had gone into the Church for the outmoded reason that the Church is the 
traditional profession for younger sons His first cure had been in a large, 
slummy parish m East London-a nasty, hoohgamsh place it had been, and he 
looked back on it with loathing Even m those days the lower class (as he 
made a point of calling them) were getting decidedly out of hand It was a little 
better when he was curate-m-charge at some remote place m Kent (Dorothy 
had been born m Kent), where the decently down-trodden villagers still 
touched their hats to ‘parson’ But by that time he had married, and his 



A Clergyman’ s Daughter 265 

marriage had been diabolically unhappy, moreover, because clergymen must 
not quarrel with their wives, its unhappiness had been secret and therefore ten 
times worse He had come to Knype Hill m 1908, aged thirty-seven and with a 
temper incurably soured-a temper which had ended by alienating every man, 
woman, and child m the parish 

It was not that he was a bad priest, merely as a priest In his purely clerical 
duties he was scrupulously 'correct-perhaps a little too correct for a Low 
Church East Anglian parish He conducted his services with perfect taste, 
preached admirable sermons, and got up at uncomfortable hours of the 
morning to celebrate Holy Communion every Wednesday and Friday But 
that a clergyman has any duties outside the four walls of the church was a thing 
that had never seriously occurred to him Unable to afford a curate, he left the 
dirty work of the parish entirely to his wife, and after her death (she died in 
1921) to Dorothy People used to say, spitefully and untruly, that he would 
have let Dorothy preach his sermons for him if it had been possible The ‘lower 
classes’ had grasped from the first what was his attitude towards them, and if 
he had been a rich man they would probably have licked his boots, according to 
their custom, as it was, they merely hated him Not that he cared whether they 
hated him or not, for he was largely unaware of their existence But even with 
the upper classes he had got on no better With the County he had quarrelled 
one by one, and as for the petty gentry of the town, as the grandson of a baronet 
he despised them, and was at no pains to hide it In twenty-three years he had 
succeeded in reducmg the congregation of St Athelstan’s from six hundred to 
something under two hundred 

This was not solely due to personal reasons It was also because the old- 
fashioned High Anglicanism to which the Rector obstinately clung was of a 
kind to annoy all parties in the parish about equally Nowadays, a clergyman 
who wants to keep his congregation has only two courses open to him Either it 
must be Anglo-Catholicism pure and simple-or rather, pure and not simple, 
or he must be daringly modern and broad-minded and preach comforting 
sermons proving that there is no Hell and all good religions are the same The 
Rector did neither On the one hand, he had the deepest contempt for the 
Anglo-Catholic movement It had passed over his head, leaving him absolutely 
untouched, ‘Roman Fever’ was his name for it On the other hand, he was too 
‘High’ for the older members of his congregation From time to time he scared 
them almost out of their wits by the use of the fatal word ‘Catholic’, not only in 
its sanctified place in the Creeds, but also from the pulpit Naturally the 
congregation dwindled year by year, and it was the Best People who were the 
first to go Lord Pockthorne of Pockthome Court, who owned a fifth of the 
county, Mr Leavis, the retired leather merchant, Sir Edward Huson of 
Crabtree Hall, and such of the petty gentry as owned motor-cars, had all 
deserted St Athelstan’s Most of them drove over on Sunday mornings to 
Millborough, five miles away Millborough was a town of five thousand 
inhabitants, and you had your choice of two churches, St Edmund’s and St 
Wedekind’s. St Edmund’s was Modernist— text from Blake’s ‘Jerusalem’ 
blazoned over the altar, and communion wme out of liqueur glasses-and St 



266 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

Wedekind’s was Anglo-Catholic and m a state of perpetual guerrilla warfare 
with the Bishop But Mr Cameron, the secretary of the Knype Hill 
Conservative Club, was a Roman Catholic convert, and his children were in 
the thick of the Roman Catholic literary movement They were said to have a 
parrot which they were teaching to say ‘Extra ecclesiam nulla sains' In effect, 
no one of any standing remained true to St Athelstan’s, except Miss Mayfill, of 
The Grange Most of Miss Mayfill’ s money was bequeathed to the Church-so 
she said, meanwhile, she had never been known to put more than sixpence m 
the collection bag, and she seemed likely to go on living for ever 

The first ten minutes of breakfast passed in complete silence Dorothy was 
trying to summon up courage to speak-obviously she had got to start some 
kind of conversation before raising the money-question-but her father was 
not an easy man with whom to make small talk At times he would fall into such 
deep fits of abstraction that you could hardly get him to listen to you, at other 
times he was all too attentive, listened carefully to what you said and then 
pointed out, rather wearily, that it was not worth saying Polite platitudes-the 
weather, and so forth-generally moved him to sarcasm Nevertheless, 
Dorothy decided to try the weather first 

c It’s a funny kind of day, isn’t it’’ she said-aware, even as she made it, of the 
inanity of this remark 

‘What is funny’’ inquired the Rector 

‘Well, I mean, it was so cold and misty this morning, and now the sun’s 
come out and it’s turned quite fine ’ 

‘Is there anything particularly funny about that’’ 

That was no good, obviously He must have had bad news, she thought She 
tried again 

‘I do wish you’d come out and have a look at the things in the back garden 
some time. Father The runner beans are doing so splendidly' The pods are 
going to be over a foot long I’m going to keep all the best of them for the 
Harvest Festival, of course I thought it would look so nice if we decorated the 
pulpit with festoons of runner beans and a few tomatoes hanging m among 
them ’ 

This was a faux pas The Rector looked up from his plate with an expression 
of profound distaste 

‘My dear Dorothy,’ he said sharply, ‘is it necessary to begin worrying me 
about the Harvest Festival already’’ 

‘I’m sorry, Father' 5 said Dorothy, disconcerted ‘I didn’t mean to worry 
you I just thought-’ 

‘Do you suppose’, proceeded the Rector, ‘it is any pleasure to me to have to 
preach my sermon among festoons of runner beans’ I am not a greengrocer It 
quite puts me off my breakfast to think of it When is the wretched thing due to 
happen’’ 

‘It’s September the sixteenth, Father ’ 

‘That’s nearly a month hence For Heaven’s sake let me forget it a little 
longer' I suppose we must have this ridiculous business once a year to tickle the 
vanity of every amateur gardener m the parish But don’t let’s think of it more 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 267 

than is absolutely necessary * 

The Rector had, as Dorothy ought to have remembered, a perfect 
abhorrence of Harvest Festivals He had even lost a valuable parishioner- a Mr 
Toagis, a surly retired market gardener-through his dislike, as he said, of 
seeing his church dressed up to imitate a coster’s stall Mr Toagis, amma 
naturaliter Nonconformistica , had been kept ‘Church’ solely by the privilege, at 
Harvest Festival time, of decorating the side altar with a sort of Stonehenge 
composed of gigantic vegetable marrows The previous summer he had 
succeeded in growing a perfect leviathan of a pumpkin, a fiery red thing so 
enormous that it took two men to lift it This monstrous object had been placed 
in the chancel, where it dwarfed the altar and took all the colour out of the east 
window In no matter what part of the church you were standing, the 
pumpkin, as the saying goes, hit you in the eye Mr Toagis was m raptures He 
hung about the church at all hours, unable to tear himself away from his 
adored pumpkin, and even bringing relays of friends in to admire it From the 
expression of his face you would have thought that he was quoting 
Wordsworth on Westminster Bridge 

Earth has not any thing to show more fair 
Dull would he be of soul who could pass by 
A sight so touching in its majesty 1 

Dorothy even had hopes, after this, of getting him to come to Holy 
Communion But when the Rector saw the pumpkin he was seriously angry, 
and ordered ‘that revolting thing’ to be removed at once Mr Toagis had 
instantly ‘gone chapel’, and he and his heirs were lost to the Church for ever 
Dorothy decided to make one final attempt at conversation 
‘We’re getting on with the costumes for Charles /,’ she said (The Church 
School children were rehearsing a play entitled Charles I in aid of the organ 
fund ) ‘But I do wish we’d chosen something a bit easier The armour is a 
dreadful job to make, and I’m afraid the jackboots are going to be worse I 
think next time we must really have a Roman or Greek play Something where 
they only have to wear togas ’ 

This elicited only another muted grunt from the Rector School plays, 
pageants, bazaars, jumble sales, and concerts in aid of were not quite so bad in 
his eyes as Harvest Festivals, but he did not pretend to be interested m them 
They were necessary evils, he used to say At this moment Ellen, the 
maidservant, pushed open the door and came gauchely into the room with one 
large, scaly hand holding her sacking apron against her belly She was a tall, 
round-shouldered girl with mouse-coloured hair, a plaintive voice, and a bad 
complexion, and she suffered chronically from eczema Her eyes flitted 
apprehensively towards the Rector, but she addressed herself to Dorothy, for 
she was too much afraid of the Rector to speak to him directly 
‘Please, Miss-’ she began, 

‘Yes, Ellen?’ 

‘Please, Miss,’ went on Ellen plaintively, ‘Mr Porter’s m the kitchen, and he 
says, please could the Rector come round and baptize Mrs Porter’s baby? 



268 A Clergyman's Daughter 

Because they don’t think as it’s going to live the day out, and it ain’t been 
baptized yet, Miss ’ 

Dorothy stood up ‘Sit down,’ said the Rector promptly, with his mouth 
full 

‘What do they think is the matter with the baby?’ said Dorothy 
‘Well, Miss, it’s turning quite black And it’s had diarrhoea something 
cruel ’ 

The Rector emptied his mouth with an effort ‘Must I have these disgusting 
details while I am eating my breakfast?’ he exclaimed He turned on Ellen 
‘Send Porter about his business and tell him I’ll be round at his house at twelve 
o’clock I really cannot think why it is that the lower classes always seem to 
choose mealtimes to come pestering one,’ he added, casting another irritated 
glance at Dorothy as she sat down 

Mr Porter was a labouring man-a bricklayer, to be exact The Rector’s 
views on baptism were entirely sound If it had been urgently necessary he 
would have walked twenty miles through snow to baptize a dying baby But he 
did not like to see Dorothy proposing to leave the breakfast table at the call of a 
common bricklayer 

There was no further conversation during breakfast Dorothy’s heart was 
sinking lower and lower The demand for money had got to be made, and yet it 
was perfectly obvious that it was foredoomed to failure His breakfast finished, 
the Rector got up from the table and began to fill his pipe from the tobacco-jar 
on the mantelpiece Dorothy uttered a short prayer for courage, and then 
pinched herself Go on, Dorothy' Out with it' No funking, please' With an 
effort she mastered her voice and said 
‘Father-’ 

‘What is it’’ said the Rector, pausing with the match m his hand 
‘Father, I’ve something I want to ask you Something important ’ 

The expression of the Rector’s face changed He had divined instantly what 
she was gomg to say, and, curiously enough, he now looked less irritable than 
before A stony calm had settled upon his face He looked like a rather 
exceptionally aloof and unhelpful sphinx 

‘Now, my dear Dorothy, I know very well what you are gomg to say I 
suppose you are gomg to ask me for money again Is that it?’ 

‘Yes, Father Because-’ 

‘Well, I may as well save you the trouble I have no money at all-absolutely 
no money at all until next quarter You have had your allowance, and I can’t 
give you a halfpenny more It’s quite useless to come worrying me now ’ 

‘But, Father-’ 

Dorothy’s heart sank yet lower. What was worst of all when she came to him 
for money was the terrible, unhelpful calmness of his attitude He was never so 
unmoved as when you were reminding him that he was up to his eyes in debt 
Apparently he could not understand that tradesmen occasionally want to be 
paid, and that no house can be kept going without an adequate supply of 
money He allowed Dorothy eighteen pounds a month for all the household 
expenses, including Ellen’s wages, and at the same time he was ‘dainty’ about 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 269 

his food and instantly detected any falling off in its quality The result was, of 
course, that the household was perennially m debt But the Rector paid not the 
smallest attention to his debts-indeed, he was hardly even aware of them 
When he lost money over an investment, he was deeply agitated, but as for a 
debt to a mere tradesman-well, it was the kind of thing that he simply could 
not bother his head about 

A peaceful plume of smoke floated upwards from the Rector’s pipe He was 
gazing with a meditative eye at the steel engraving of Charles I and had 
probably forgotten already about Dorothy’s demand for money Seeing him so 
unconcerned, a pang of desperation went through Dorothy, and her courage 
came back to her She said more sharply than before 
‘Father, please listen to me 1 I must have some money soon 1 I simply must ] 
We can’t go on as we’re doing We owe money to nearly every tradesman mthe 
town It’s got so that some mornings I can hardly bear to go down the street 
and think of all the bills that are owing Do you know that we owe Cargill 
nearly twenty-two pounds?’ 

‘What of it?’ said the Rector between puffs of smoke 
‘But the bill’s been mounting up for over seven months' He’s sent it m over 
and over again We must pay it' It’s so unfair to him to keep him waiting for his 
money like that'’ 

‘Nonsense, my dear child' These people expect to be kept waiting for their 
money They like it It brings them more in the end Goodness knows how 
much I owe to Catkin & Palm - 1 should hardly care to inquire They are 
dunning me by every post But you don’t hear me complaining, do you 7 *’ 

‘But, Father, I can’t look at it as you do, I can’t' It’s so dreadful to be always 
m debt' Even if it isn’t actually wrong, it’s so hateful It makes me so ashamed' 
When I go into Cargill’s shop to order the joint, he speaks to me so shortly and 
makes me wait after the other customers, all because our bill’s mounting up the 
whole time And yet I daren’t stop ordering from him I believe he’d run us in 
if I did ’ 

The Rector frowned ‘What' Do you mean to say the fellow has been 
impertinent to you?’ 

‘I didn’t say he’d been impertinent, Father But you can’t blame him if he’s 
angry when his bill’s not paid ’ 

‘I most certainly can blame him' It is simply abominable how these people 
take it upon themselves to behave nowadays-abominable' But there you are, 
you see That is the kind of thing that we are exposed to m this delightful 
century That is democracy -progress, as they are pleased to call it Don’t order 
from the fellow again Tell him at once that you are taking your account 
elsewhere That’s the only way to treat these people ’ 

‘But, Father, that doesn’t settle anything Really and truly, don’t you think 
we ought to pay him ? Surely we can get hold of the money somehow? Couldn’t 
you sell out some shares, or something?’ 

‘My dear child, don’t talk to me about selling out shares! I have just had the 
most disagreeable news from my broker He tells me that my Sumatra Tin 
shares have dropped from seven and fourpence to six and a penny It means a 



2jo A Clergyman's Daughter 

loss of nearly sixty pounds I am telling him to sell out at once before they drop 
any further ’ 

‘Then if you sell out you’ll have some ready money, won’t you? Don’t you 
think it would be better to get out of debt once and for alP’ 

‘Nonsense, nonsense,’ said the Rector more calmly, putting his pipe back m 
his mouth ‘You know nothing whatever about these matters I shall have to 
reinvest at once m something more hopeful-it’s the only way of getting my 
money back ’ 

With one thumb m the belt of his cassock he frowned abstractedly at the 
steel engraving His broker had advised United Celanese Here— m Sumatra 
Tin, United Celanese, and numberless other remote and dimly imagined 
companies- was the central cause of the Rector’s money troubles He was an 
inveterate gambler Not, of course, that he thought of it as gambling, it was 
merely a lifelong search for a ‘good investment’ On coming of age he had 
inherited four thousand pounds, which had gradually dwindled, thanks to his 
‘investments’, to about twelve hundred What was worse, every year he 
managed to scrape together, out of his miserable income, another fifty pounds 
which vanished by the same road It is a curious fact that the lure of a ‘good 
investment’ seems to haunt clergymen more persistently than any other class 
of man Perhaps it is the modern equivalent of the demons in female shape who 
used to haunt the anchorites of the Dark Ages 

‘I shall buy five hundred United Celanese,’ said the Rector finally 

Dorothy began to give up hope Her father was now thinking of his 
‘investments’ (she new nothing whatever about these ‘investments’, except 
that they went wrong with phenomenal regularity), and in another moment the 
question of the shop-debts would have slipped entirely out of his mind She 
made a final effort 

‘Father, let’s get this settled, please Do you think you’ll be able to let me 
have some extra money fairly soon? Not this moment, perhaps-but m the next 
month or two?’ 

‘No, my dear, I don’t About Christmas time, possibly-it’s very unlikely 
even then. But for the present, certainly not I haven’t a halfpenny I can spare ’ 

‘But, Father, it’s so horrible to feel we can’t pay our debts* It disgraces us so* 
Last time Mr Welwyn-Foster was here’ (Mr Welwyn-Foster was the Rural 
Dean) ‘Mrs Welwyn-Foster was going all round the town asking everyone the 
most personal questions about us- asking how we spent our time, and how 
much money we had, and how many tons of coal we used in a year, and 
everything She’s always trying to pry into our affairs Suppose she found out 
that we were badly in debt 1 ’ 

‘Surely it is our own business? I fail entirely to see what it has to do with Mrs 
Welwyn-Foster or anyone else ’ 

‘But she’d repeat it all over the place-and she’d exaggerate it too* You know 
what Mrs Welwyn-Foster is. In every parish she goes to she tries to find out 
something disgraceful about the clergyman, and then she repeats every word 
of it to the Bishop I don’t want to be uncharitable about her, but really she-’ 

Realizing that she did want to be uncharitable, Dorothy was silent 



A Clergyman' s Daughter 271 

‘She is a detestable woman/ said the Rector evenly ‘What of 1 t? Who ever 
heard of a Rural Dean’s wife who wasn’t detestable?’ 

‘But, Father, I don’t seem to be able to get you to see how serious things are 1 
We’ve simply nothing to live on for the next month I don’t even know where 
the meat’s coming from for today’s dinner ’ 

‘Luncheon, Dorothy, luncheon 1 ’ said the Rector with a touch of irritation ‘I 
do wish you would drop that abominable lower-class habit of calling the 
midday meal dinner >’ 

‘For luncheon, then Where are we to get the meat from? I daren’t ask 
Cargill for another joint ’ 

‘Go to the other butcher-what’s his name? Salter-and take no notice of 
Cargill He knows he’ll be paid sooner or later Good gracious, I don’t know 
what all this fuss is about 1 Doesn’t everyone owe money to his tradesmen? I 
distinctly remember’ -the Rector straightened his shoulders a little, and, 
putting his pipe back into his mouth, looked into the distance, his voice 
became reminiscent and perceptibly more agreeable- ‘I distinctly remember 
that when I was up at Oxford, my father had still not paid some of his own 
Oxford bills of thirty years earlier Tom’ (Tom was the Rector’s cousin, the 
Baronet) ‘owed seven thousand before he came into his money He told me so 
himself ’ 

At that, Dorothy’s last hope vanished When her father began to talk about 
his cousin Tom, and about things that had happened ‘when I was up at 
Oxford’, there was nothing more to be done with him It meant that he had 
slipped into an imaginary golden past in which such vulgar things as butchers’ 
bills simply did not exist There were long periods together when he seemed 
actually to forget that he was only a poverty-stricken country Rector-that he 
was not a young man of family with estates and reversions at his back. The 
aristocratic, the expensive attitude was the one that m all circumstances came 
the most naturally to him And of course while he lived, not uncomfortably, in 
the world of his imagination, it was Dorothy who had to fight the tradesmen 
and make a leg of mutton last from Sunday to Wednesday But she knew the 
complete uselessness of arguing with him any longer It would only end m 
making him angry She got up from the table and began to pile the breakfast 
things on to the tray 

‘You’re absolutely certain you can’t let me have any money, Father?’ she 
said for the last time, at the door, with the tray m her arms 

The Rector, gazing into the middle distance, amid comfortable wreaths of 
smoke, did not hear her He was thinking, perhaps, of his golden Oxford days 
Dorothy went out of the room distressed almost to the point of tears The 
miserable question of the debts was once more shelved, as it had been shelved a 
thousand times before, with no prospect of final solution. 



3 


On her elderly bicycle with the basketwork carrier on the handle-bars, 
Dorothy free-wheeled down the hill, doing mental arithmetic with three 
pounds nineteen and fourpence-her entire stock of money until next quarter- 
day 

She had been through the list of things that were needed m the kitchen But 
indeed, was there anything that was not needed m the kitchen? Tea, coffee, 
soap, matches, candles, sugar, lentils, firewood, soda, lamp oil, boot polish, 
margarine, baking powder-there seemed to be practically nothing that they 
were not running short of And at every moment some fresh item that she had 
forgotten popped up and dismayed her The laundry bill, for example, and the 
fact that the coal was running short, and the question of the fish for Friday 
The Rector was ‘difficult’ about fish Roughly speaking, he would only eat the 
more expensive kinds, cod, whiting, sprats, skate, herrings, and kippers he 
refused 

Meanwhile, she had got to settle about the meat for today’s 
dmner-luncheon (Dorothy was careful to obey her father and call it luncheon , 
when she remembered it On the other hand, you could not m honesty call the 
evening meal anything but ‘supper’, so there was no such meal as ‘dinner’ at 
the Rectory ) Better make an omelette for luncheon today, Dorothy decided 
She dared not go to Cargill again Though, of course, if they had an omelette 
for luncheon and then scrambled eggs for supper, her father would probably 
be sarcastic about it Last time they had eggs twice m one day, he had inquired 
coldly, ‘Have you started a chicken farm, Dorothy?’And perhaps tomorrow 
she would get two pounds of sausages at the International, and that staved off 
the meat-question for one day more 

Thirty-nine further days, with only three pounds mneteen and fburpence to 
provide for them, loomed up in Dorothy’s imagination, sending through her a 
wave of self-pity which she checked almost instantly. Now then, Dorothy 1 No 
snivelling, please' It all comes right somehow if you trust in God Matthew vi, 
25 The Lord will provide Will He? Dorothy removed her right hand from 
the handle-bars and felt for the glass-headed pm, but the blasphemous 
thought faded. At this moment she became aware of the gloomy red face 
of Proggett, who was hailing her respectfully but urgently from the side of the 
road 

Dorothy stopped and got off her bicycle. 

‘Beg pardon, Miss,’ said Proggett ‘I been wanting to speak to you, 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 


273 


Miss-partic’lar ’ 

Dorothy sighed inwardly When Proggett wanted to speak to you partic’lar , 
you could be perfectly certain what was coming, it was some piece of alarming 
news about the condition of the church Proggett was a pessimistic, 
conscientious man, and very loyal churchman, after his fashion Too dim of 
intellect to have any definite religious beliefs, he showed his piety by an intense 
solicitude about the state of the church buildings He had decided long ago that 
the Church of Christ meant the actual walls, roof, and tower of St Athelstan’s, 
Knype Hill, and he would poke round the church at all hours of the day, 
gloomily noting a cracked stone here, a worm-eaten beam there-and 
afterwards, of course, coming to harass Dorothy with demands for repairs 
which would cost impossible sums of money 

‘What is it, Proggett ? 5 said Dorothy 

‘Well, Miss, it’s they- 5 -here a peculiar, imperfect sound, not a word 
exactly, but the ghost of a word, all but formed itself on Proggett’s lips It 
seemed to begin with a B Proggett was one of those men who are for ever on 
the verge of swearing, but who always recapture the oath as it is escaping 
between their teeth Tt 5 s they bells, Miss,’ he said, getting rid of the B sound 
with an effort ‘They bells up in the church tower They’re a-splmtermg 
through that there belfry floor in a way as it makes you fair shudder to look at 
’em We’ll have ’em down atop of us before we know where we are I was up 
the belfry ’smormng, and I tell you I come down faster’n I went up, when I 
saw how that there floor’s a-bustmg underneath ’em 

Proggett came to complain about the condition of the bells not less than once 
a fortnight It was now three years that they had been lying on the floor of the 
belfry, because the cost of either reswmgmg or removing them was estimated 
at twenty-five pounds, which might as well have been twenty-five thousand for 
all the chance there was of paying for it They were really almost as dangerous 
as Proggett made out It was quite certain that, if not this year or next year, at 
any rate at some time m the near future, they would fall through the belfry 
floor into the church porch And, as Proggett was fond of pointing out, it 
would probably happen on a Sunday morning just as the congregation were 
coming into church 

Dorothy sighed again Those wretched bells were never out of mind for 
long, there were times when the thought of their falling even got into her 
dreams There was always some trouble or other at the church Ifitwasnotthe 
belfry, then it was the roof or the walls, or it was a broken pew which the 
carpenter wanted ten shillings to mend, or it was seven hymn-books needed at 
one and sixpence each, or the flue of the stove choked up-and the sweep’s fee 
was half a crown-or a smashed window-pane or the choir-boys’ cassocks m 
rags There was never enough money for anything The new organ which the 
Rector had insisted on buying five years earlier- the old one, he said, reminded 
him of a cow with the asthma-was a burden under which the Church Expenses 
fund had been staggering ever since 

T don’t know what we can do,’ said Dorothy finally; ‘I really don’t. We’ve 
simply no money at all And even if we do make anything out of the school- 



2j4 A Clergyman' s Daughter 

children’s play, it’s all got to go to the organ fund The organ people are really 
getting quite nasty about their bill Have you spoken to my father^’ 

‘Yes, Miss He don’t make nothing of it “Belfry’s held up five hundred 
years,” he says, “we can trust it to hold up a few years longer ’” 

This was quite according to precedent The fact that the church was visibly 
collapsing over his head made no impression on the Rector, he simply ignored 
it, as he ignored anything else that he did not wish to be worried about 
‘Well, I don’t know what we can do,’ Dorothy repeated ‘Of course there’s 
the jumble sale coming off the week after next I’m counting on Miss Mayfill to 
give us something really nice for the jumble sale I know she could afford to 
She’s got such lots of furniture and things that she never uses I was in her 
house the other day, and I saw a most beautiful Lowestoft chma tea service 
which was put away in a cupboard, and she told me it hadn’t been used for over 
twenty years Just suppose she gave us that tea service 1 It would fetch pounds 
and pounds We must just pray that the jumble sale will be a success, Proggett 
Pray that it’ll bring us five pounds at least I’m sure we shall get the money 
somehow if we really and truly pray for it ’ 

‘Yes, Miss,’ said Proggett respectfully, and shifted his gaze to the far 
distance 

At this moment a horn hooted and a vast, gleaming blue car came very 
slowly down the road, making for the High Street Out of one window Mr 
Blifil-Gordon, the Proprietor of the sugar-beet refinery, was thrusting a sleek 
black head which went remarkably ill with his suit of sandy-coloured Harris 
tweed As he passed, instead of ignoring Dorothy as usual, he flashed upon her 
a smile so warm that it was almost amorous With him were his eldest son 
Ralph-or, as he and the rest of the family pronounced it, Walph-an epicene 
youth of twenty, given to the writing of sub-Eliot vers libre poems, and Lord 
Pockthorne’s two daughters They were all smiling, even Lord Pockthorne’s 
daughters Dorothy was astomshed, for it was several years since any of these 
people had deigned to recognize her in the street 

‘Mr Blifil-Gordon is very friendly this morning,’ she said 
‘Aye, Miss I’ll be bound he is It’s the election coming on next week, that’s 
what ’tis All honey and butter they are till they’ve made sure as you’ll vote for 
them, and then they’ve forgot your very face the day afterwards ’ 

‘Oh, the election'’ said Dorothy vaguely So remote were such things as 
parliamentary elections from the daily round of parish work that she was 
virtually unaware of them-hardly, indeed, even knowing the difference 
between Liberal and Conservative or Socialist and Communist ‘Well, 
Proggett,’ she said, immediately forgetting the election in favour of something 
more important, Til speak to Father and tell him how serious it is about the 
bells, I think perhaps the best thing we can do will be to get up a special 
subscription, just for the bells alone There’s no knowing, we might make five 
pounds We might even make ten pounds' Don’t you think if I went to Miss 
Mayfill and asked her to start the subscription with five pounds, she might give 
it to us?’ 

‘You take my word, Miss, and don’t you let Miss Mayfill hear nothing about 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 27 s 

it It’d scare the life out of her If she thought as that tower wasn’t safe, we’d 
never get her inside that church again ’ 

‘Oh dear 1 1 suppose not ’ 

‘No, Miss We shan’t get nothing out of her, the old-’ 

A ghostly B floated once more across Proggett’s lips His mind a little more 
at rest now that he had delivered his fortnightly report upon the bells, he 
touched his cap and departed, while Dorothy rode on into the High Street, 
with the twin problems of the shop-debts and the Church Expenses pursuing 
one another through her mind like the twin refrains of a villanelle 
The still watery sun, now playing hide-and-seek. April-wise, among woolly 
islets of cloud, sent an oblique beam down the High Street, gilding the house- 
fronts of the northern side It was one of those sleepy, old-fashioned streets 
that look so ideally peaceful on a casual visit and so very different when you live 
in them and have an enemy or a creditor behind every window The only 
definitely offensive buildings were Ye Olde Tea Shoppe (plaster front with 
sham beams nailed on to it, bottle-glass windows and revolting curly roof like 
that of a Chinese joss-house), and the new. Doric-pillared post office After 
about two hundred yards the High Street forked, forming a tiny market-place, 
adorned with a pump, now defunct, and a worm-eaten pair of stocks On either 
side of the pump stood the Dog and Bottle, the principal inn of the town, and 
the Knype Hill Conservative Club At the end, commanding the street, stood 
Cargill’s dreaded shop 

Dorothy came round the corner to a terrific dm of cheering, mingled with 
the strains of ‘Rule Britannia’ played on the trombone The normally sleepy 
street was black with people, and more people were hurrying from all the side- 
streets Evidently a sort of triumphal procession was taking place Right across 
the street, from the roof of the Dog and Bottle to the roof of the Conservative 
Club, hung a line with innumerable blue streamers, and m the middle a vast 
banner inscribed ‘Blifil-Gordon and the Empire 1 ’ Towards this, between the 
lanes of people, the Blifil-Gordon car was moving at a foot-pace, with Mr 
Blifil-Gordon smiling richly, first to one side, then to the other In front of the 
car marched a detachment of the Buffaloes, headed by an earnest-looking little 
man playing the trombone, and carrying among them another banner 
inscribed 


Who’ll save Britain from the Reds’ 

BLIFIL-GORDON 

Who’ll put the Beer back into your Pot’ 

BLIFIL-GORDON 

Blifil-Gordon for ever 1 

From the window of the Conservative Club floated an enormous Union 
Jack, above which six scarlet faces were beaming enthusiastically 
Dorothy wheeled her bicycle slowly down the street, too much agitated by 
the prospect of passing Cargill’s shop (she had got to pass it, to get to 
Solepipe’s) to take much notice of the procession The Blifil-Gordon car had 



2j6 A Clergyman 3 s Daughter 

halted for a moment outside Ye Olde Tea Shoppe Forward, the coffee 
brigade 1 Half the ladies of the town seemed to be hurrying forth, with lapdogs 
or shopping baskets on their arms, to cluster about the car like Bacchantes 
about the car of the vme-god After all, an election is practically the only time 
when you get a chance of exchanging smiles with the County There were 
eager feminine cries of ‘Good luck, Mr Blifil- Gordon' Dear Mr Blifil-Gordon' 
We do hope you’ll get in, Mr Blifil-Gordon 1 ’ Mr Blifil-Gordon’s largesse of 
smiles was unceasing, but carefully graded To the populace he gave a 
diffused, general smile, not resting on individuals, to the coffee ladies and the 
six scarlet patriots of the Conservative Club he gave one smile each, to the most 
favoured of all, young Walph gave an occasional wave of the hand and a 
squeaky ‘Cheewio 1 ’ 

Dorothy’s heart tightened She had seen that Mr Cargill, like the rest of the 
shopkeepers, was standing on his doorstep He was a tall, evil-looking man, in 
blue-striped apron, with a lean, scraped face as purple as one of his own joints 
of meat that had lain a little too long in the window So fascinated were 
Dorothy’s eyes by that ominous figure that she did not look where she was 
going, and bumped into a very large, stout man who was stepping off the 
pavement backwards 

The stout man turned round ‘Good Heavens 1 It’s Dorothy 1 ’ he exclaimed 

‘Why, Mr Warburton' How extraordinary' Do you know, I had a feeling I 
was going to meet you today ’ 

‘By the pricking of your thumbs, I presume ? 3 said Mr Warburton, beaming 
all over a large, pink, Micawberish face ‘And how are you? But by Jove 1 ’ he 
added, ‘What need is there to ask? You look more bewitching than ever ’ 

He pinched Dorothy’s bare elbow-she had changed, after breakfast, into a 
sleeveless gingham frock Dorothy stepped hurriedly backwards to get out of 
his reach-she hated being pinched or otherwise ‘mauled about’-and said 
rather severely 

‘ Please don’t pinch my elbow I don’t like it 3 

‘My dear Dorothy, who could resist an elbow like yours? It’s the sort of 
elbow one pinches automatically A reflex action, if you understand me ’ 

‘When did you get back to Knype Hill ? 3 said Dorothy, who had put her 
bicycle between Mr Warburton and herself ‘It’s over two months since I’ve 
seen you 3 

‘I got back the day before yesterday But this is only a flying visit I’m off 
again tomorrow I’m taking the kids to Brittany The bastards, you know 3 

Mr Warburton pronounced the word bastards, at which Dorothy looked 
away in discomfort, with a touch of naive pride He and his ‘bastards’ (he had 
three of them) were one of the chief scandals of Knype Hill He was a man of 
independent income, calling himself a painter-he produced about half a dozen 
mediocre landscapes every year-and he had come to Knype Hill two years 
earlier and bought one of the new villas behind the Rectory There he lived, or 
rather stayed periodically, m open concubinage with a woman whom he called 
his housekeeper Four months ago this woman-she was a foreigner, a 
Spaniard it was said-had created a fresh and worse scandal by abruptly 



A Clergyman 3 s Daughter 277 

deserting him, and his three children were now parked with some long- 
suffering relative m London In appearance he was a fine, imposing-looking 
man, though entirely bald (he was at great pains to conceal this), and he carried 
himself with such a rakish air as to give the impression that his fairly sizeable 
belly was merely a kind of annexe to his chest His age was forty-eight, and he 
owned to forty-four People in the town said that he was a ‘proper old rascal’, 
young girls were afraid of him, not without reason 
Mr Warburton had laid his hand pseudo-paternally on Dorothy’s shoulder 
and was shepherding her through the crowd, talking all the while almost 
without a pause The Blifil- Gordon car, having rounded the pump, was now 
wending its way back, still accompanied by its troupe of middle-aged 
Bacchantes Mr Warburton, his attention caught, paused to scrutinize it 
‘What is the meaning of these disgusting antics’’ he asked 
‘Oh, they’re- what is it they call lt’-electioneering Trying to get us to vote 
for them, I suppose ’ 

‘Trying to get us to vote for them' Good God 1 ’ murmured Mr Warburton, 
as he eyed the triumphal cortege He raised the large, silver-headed cane that 
he always carried, and pointed, rather expressively, first at one figure in the 
procession and then at another ‘Look at it 1 Just look at it 1 Look at those 
fawning hags, and that half-witted oaf grinning at us like a monkey that sees a 
bag of nuts Did you ever see such a disgusting spectacle’’ 

‘Do be careful 1 ’ Dorothy murmured ‘Somebody’s sure to hear you ’ 
‘Good 1 ’ said Mr Warburton, immediately raising his voice ‘And to think 
that low-born hound actually has the impertinence to think that he’s pleasing 
us with the sight of his false teeth 1 And that suit he’s wearing is an offence m 
itself Is there a Socialist candidate’ If so, I shall certainly vote for him ’ 
Several people on the pavement turned and stared Dorothy saw little Mr 
Twiss, the ironmonger, a weazened, leather-coloured old man, peering with 
veiled malevolence round the corner of the rush baskets that hung m his 
doorway He had caught the word Socialist, and was mentally registering Mr 
Warburton as a Socialist and Dorothy as the friend of Socialists 

‘I really must be getting on,’ said Dorothy hastily, feeling that she had better 
escape before Mr Warburton said something even more tactless ‘I’ve got ever 
such a lot of shopping to do I’ll say good-bye for the present, then ’ 

‘Oh, no, you won’t 1 ’ said Mr Warburton cheerfully ‘Not a bit of it* I’ll come 
with you ’ 

As she wheeled her bicycle down the street he marched at her side, still 
talking, with his large chest well forward and his stick tucked under his arm. 
He was a difficult man to shake off, and though Dorothy counted him as a 
friend, she did sometimes wish, he being the town scandal and she the Rector’s 
daughter, that he would not always choose the most public places to talk to her 
in At this moment, however, she was rather grateful for his company, which 
made it appreciably easier to pass Cargill’s shop-for Cargill was still on his 
doorstep and was regarding her with a sidelong, meaning gaze 

‘It was a bit of luck my meeting you this morning,’ Mr Warburton went on. 
‘In fact, I was looking for yoti , Who do you think I’ve got coming to dinner 



27 8 A Clergyman's Daughter 

with me tonight? Bewley- Ronald Bewley You’ve heard of him, of course?’ 
‘Ronald Bewley? No, I don’t think so Who is he?’ 

‘Why, dash it' Ronald Bewley, the novelist Author of Fishpools and 
Concubines Surely you’ve read Fishpools and Concubines ?’ 

‘No, I’m afraid I haven’t In fact, I’d never even heard of it ’ 

‘My dear Dorothy 1 You have been neglecting yourself You certainly ought 
to read Fishpools and Concubines It’s hot stuff, I assure you-real high-class 
pornography Just the kind of thing you need to take the taste of the Girl 
Guides out of your mouth ’ 

‘I do wish you wouldn’t say such things 1 ’ said Dorothy, looking away 
uncomfortably, and then immediately looking back again because she had all 
but caught Cargill’s eye ‘Where does this Mr Bewley live?’ she added ‘Not 
here, surely, does he?’ 

‘No He’s coming over from Ipswich for dinner, and perhaps to stay the 
night That’s why I was looking for you I thought you might like to meet him 
How about your coming to dinner tonight?’ 

‘I can’t possibly come to dinner,’ said Dorothy ‘I’ve got Father’s supper to 
see to, and thousands of other things I shan’t be free till eight o’clock or after ’ 
‘Well, come along after dinner, then I’d like you to know Bewley He’s an 
interesting fellow- very au fait with all the Bloomsbury scandal, and all that 
You’ll enjoy meeting him. It’ll do you good to escape from the church hen- 
coop for a few hours ’ 

Dorothy hesitated She was tempted To tell the truth, she enjoyed her 
occasional visits to Mr Warburton’s house extremely But of course they were 
very occasional-once m three or four months at the oftenest, it so obviously 
didn't do to associate too freely with such a man And even when she did go to 
his house she was careful to make sure beforehand that there was going to be at 
least one other visitor 

Two years earlier, when Mr Warburton had first come to Knype Hill (at that 
time he was posing as a widower with two children, a little later, however, the 
housekeeper suddenly gave birth to a third child in the middle of the night), 
Dorothy had met him at a tea-party and afterwards called on him Mr 
Warburton had given her a delightful tea, talked amusingly about books, and 
then, immediately after tea, sat down beside her on the sofa and begun making 
love to her, violently, outrageously, even brutally It was practically an assault 
Dorothy was horrified almost out of her wits, though not too horrified to resist 
She escaped from him and took refuge on the other side of the sofa, white, 
shaking, and almost m tears Mr Warburton, on the other hand, was quite 
unashamed and even seemed rather amused 
‘Oh, how could you, how could you?’ she sobbed 
‘But it appears that I couldn’t,’ said Mr Warburton 
‘Oh, but how could you be such a brute?’ 

‘Oh, that> Easily, my child, easily You will understand that when you get to 
my age,’ 

In spite of this bad beginning, a sort of friendship had grown up between the 
two, oven to the extent of Dorothy being ‘talked about’ in connexion with Mr 



A Clergyman 1 s Daughter 279 

Warburton It did not take much to get you ‘talked about’ m Knype Hill She 
only saw him at long intervals and took the greatest care never to be alone with 
him, but even so he found opportunities of making casual love to her But it 
was done m a gentlemanly fashion, the previous disagreeable incident was not 
repeated Afterwards, when he was forgiven, Mr Warburton had explained 
that he ‘always tried it on’ with every presentable woman he met 

‘Don’t you get rather a lot of snubs?’ Dorothy could not help asking him 
‘Oh, certainly But I get quite a number of successes as well, you know ’ 
People wondered sometimes how such a girl as Dorothy could consort, even 
occasionally, with such a man as Mr Warburton, but the hold that he had over 
her was the hold that the blasphemer and evil-liver always has over the pious 
It is a fact-you have only to look about you to verify it-that the pious and the 
immoral drift naturally together The best brothel-scenes in literature have 
been written, without exception, by pious believers or pious unbelievers And 
of course Dorothy, born into the twentieth century, made a point of listening 
to Mr Warburton’s blasphemies as calmly as possible, it is fatal to flatter the 
wicked by letting them see that you are shocked by them Besides, she was 
genuinely fond of him He teased her and distressed her, and yet she got from 
him, without being fully aware of it, a species of sympathy and understanding 
which she could not get elsewhere For all his vices he was distinctly likeable, 
and the shoddy brilliance of his conversation-Oscar Wilde seven times 
watered-which she was too inexperienced to see through, fascinated while it 
shocked her Perhaps, too, m this instance, the prospect of meeting the 
celebrated Mr Bewley had its effect upon her, though certamly Fishponds and 
Concubines sounded like the kind of book that she either didn’t read or else set 
herself heavy penances for reading In London, no doubt, one would hardly 
cross the road to see fifty novelists, but these things appeared differently in 
places like Knype Hill 

‘Are you sure Mr Bewley is coming?’ she said 

‘Quite sure And his wife’s coming as well, I believe Full chaperonage No 
Tarqum and Lucrece business this evening ? 

‘All right,’ said Dorothy finally, ‘thanks very much I’ll come round- 
about half past eight, I expect ’ 

‘Good If you can manage to come while it is still daylight, so much the 
better Remember that Mrs Sempnll is my next-door neighbour We can 
count on her to be on the qm vive any time after sundown ’ 

Mrs Semprill was the town scandalmonger-the most eminent, that is, of the 
town’s many scandalmongers Having got what he wanted (he was constantly 
pestering Dorothy to come to his house more often), Mr Warburton said au 
revoir and left Dorothy to do the remainder of her shopping 

In the semi-gloom of Solepipe’s shop, she was just moving away from the 
counter with her two and a half yards of casement cloth, when she was aware of 
a low, mournful voice at her ear It was Mrs Semprill She was a slender 
woman of forty, with a lank, sallow, distinguished face, which, with her glossy 
dark hair and air of settled melancholy, gave her something the appearance of a 
Van Dyck portrait Entrenched behind a pile of cretonnes near the window. 



280 A Clergyman's Daughter 

she had been watching Dorothy’s conversation with Mr Warburton 
Whenever you were doing something that you did not particularly want Mrs 
Semprill to see you doing, you could trust her to be somewhere in the 
neighbourhood She seemed to have the power of materializing like an Arabian 
jmneeyeh at any place where she was not wanted No indiscretion, however 
small, escaped her vigilance Mr Warburton used to say that she was like the 
four beasts of the Apocalypse- ‘They are full of eyes, you remember, and they 
rest not night nor day ’ 

‘Dorothy dearest ,’ murmured Mrs Semprill in the sorrowful, affectionate 
voice of someone breaking a piece of bad news as gently as possible ‘I’ve been 
so wanting to speak io you I’ve something simply dreadful to tell you-some- 
thing that will really horrify you 1 ’ 

‘What is it?’ said Dorothy resignedly, well knowing what was coming-for 
Mrs Semprill had only one subject of conversation 

They moved out of the shop and began to walk down the street, Dorothy 
wheeling her bicycle, Mrs Semprill mmcing at her side with a delicate birdlike 
step and bringing her mouth closer and closer to Dorothy’s ear as her remarks 
grew more and more intimate 

‘Do you happen to have noticed,’ she began, ‘that girl who sits at the end of 
the pew nearest the organ in church? A rather pretty girl, with red hair I’ve no 
idea what her name is,’ added Mrs Semprill, who knew the surname and all the 
Christian names of every man, woman, and child in Knype Hill 

‘Molly Freeman,’ said Dorothy ‘She’s the niece of Freeman the 
greengrocer ’ 

‘Oh, Molly Freeman? Is that her name? I’d often wondered Well-’ 

The delicate red mouth came closer, the mournful voice sank to a shocked 
whisper Mrs Semprill began to pour forth a stream of purulent libel involving 
Molly Freeman and six young men who worked at the sugar-beet refinery 
After a few moments the story became so outrageous that Dorothy, who had 
turned very pink, hurriedly withdrew her ear from Mrs SemprilFs whispering 
lips. She stopped her bicycle 

‘I won’t listen to such things!’ she said abruptly ‘I know that isn’t true about 
Molly Freeman It can't be true 1 She’s such a nice quiet girl-she was one of my 
very best Girl Guides, and she’s always been so good about helping with the 
church bazaars and everything I’m perfectly certain she wouldn’t do such 
things as you’re saying ’ 

‘But, Dorothy dearest' When, as I told you, I actually saw with my own 
eyes ’ 

‘I don’t care ! It’s not fair to say such things about people Even if they were 
true it wouldn’t be right to repeat them There’s quite enough evil in the world 
without going about looking for it ’ 

* Looking for it!’ sighed Mrs Semprill ‘But, my dear Dorothy, as though one 
ever wanted or needed to look 1 The trouble is that one can’t help seeing all the 
dreadful wickedness that goes on m this town ’ 

Mrs Semprill was always genuinely astonished if you accused her of looking 
for subjects for scandal Nothing, she would protest, pained her more than the 



A Clergyman's Daughter 281 

spectacle of human wickedness, but it was constantly forced upon her 
unwilling eyes, and only a stern sense of duty impelled her to make it public 
Dorothy’s remarks, so far from silencing her, merely set her talking about the 
general corruption of Knype Hill, of which Molly Freeman’s misbehaviour 
was only one example And so from Molly Freeman and her six young men she 
proceeded to Dr Gaythorne, the town medical officer, who had got two of the 
nurses at the Cottage Hospital with child, and then to Mrs Corn, the Town 
Clerk’s wife, found lymg m a field dead drunk on eau-de-Cologne, and then to 
the curate at St Wedekind’s m Millborough, who had involved himself m a 
grave scandal with a choirboy, and so it went on, one thing leading to another 
For there was hardly a soul m the town or the surrounding country about 
whom Mrs Sempnll could not disclose some festering secret if you listened to 
her long enough 

It was noticeable that her stories were not only dirty and libellous, but they 
had nearly always some monstrous tinge of perversion about them Compared 
with the ordinary scandalmongers of a country town, she was Freud to 
Boccaccio From hearing her talk you would have gathered the impression that 
Knype Hill with its thousand inhabitants held more of the refinements of evil 
than Sodom, Gomorrah, and Buenos Aires put together Indeed, when you 
reflected upon the lives led by the inhabitants of this latter-day City of the 
Plam-from the manager of the local bank squandering his clients’ money on 
the children of his second and bigamous marriage, to the barmaid of the Dog 
and Bottle serving drinks in the taproom dressed only in high-heeled satin 
slippers, and from old Miss Channon, the music-teacher, with her secret gm 
bottle and her anonymous letters, to Maggie White, the baker’s daughter, who 
had borne three children to her own brother-when you considered these 
people, all, young and old, rich and poor, sunken in monstrous and Babylonian 
vices, you wondered that fire did not come down from Heaven and consume 
the town forthwith But if you listened just a little longer, the catalogue of 
obscenities became first monstrous and then unbearably dull For in a town m 
which everyone is either a bigamist, a pederast, or a drug-taker, the worst 
scandal loses its sting In fact, Mrs Sempnll was something worse than a 
slanderer, she was a bore 

As to the extent to which her stories were believed, it varied At times the 
word would go round that she was a foul-mouthed old cat and everything she 
said was a pack of lies, at other times one of her accusations would take effect 
on some unfortunate person, who would need months or even years to live it 
down She had certainly been instrumental m breaking off not less than half a 
dozen engagements and starting innumerable quarrels between husbands and 
wives 

All this while Dorothy had been making abortive efforts to shake Mrs 
Semprill off. She had edged her way gradually across the street until she was 
wheeling her bicycle along the right-hand kerb> but Mrs Semprill had 
followed, whispering without cease It was not until they reached the end of 
the High Street that Dorothy summoned up enough firmness to escape She 
halted and put her right foot on the pedal of her bicycle 



282 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

‘I really can’t stop a moment longer , 9 she said ‘I’ve got a thousand things to 
do, and I’m late already ’ 

‘Oh, but, Dorothy dear 1 I’ve something else I simply must tell you- 
something most important 

‘I’m sorry-I’m in such a terrible hurry Another time, perhaps ’ 

‘It’s about that dreadful Mr Warburton,’ said Mrs Sempnll hastily, lest 
Dorothy should escape without hearing it ‘He’s just come back From London, 
and do you know— I most particularly wanted to tell you this-do you know, he 
actually-’ 

But here Dorothy saw that she must make off instantly, at no matter what 
cost She could imagine nothing more uncomfortable than to have to discuss 
Mr Warburton with Mrs Semprill She mounted her bicycle, and with only a 
very brief ‘Sorry - 1 really can’t stop 1 ’ began to ride hurriedly away 

‘I wanted to tell you-he’s taken up with a new woman 1 ’ Mrs Semprill cried 
after her, even forgetting to whisper in her eagerness to pass on this juicy titbit 
But Dorothy rode swiftly round the corner, not looking back, and 
pretending not to have heard An unwise thing to do, for it did not pay to cut 
Mrs Semprill too short Any unwillingness to listen to her scandals was taken 
as a sign of depravity, and led to fresh and worse scandals being published 
about yourself the moment you had left her 
As Dorothy rode homewards she had uncharitable thoughts about Mrs 
Semprill, for which she duly pinched herself Also, there was another, rather 
disturbing idea which had not occurred to her till this moment-that Mrs 
Semprill would certainly learn of her visit to Mr Warburton’s house this 
evening, and would probably have magnified it into something scandalous by 
tomorrow The thought sent a vague premonition of evil through Dorothy’s 
mind as she jumped off her bicycle at the Rectory gate, where Silly Jack, the 
town idiot, a third-grade moron with a triangular scarlet face like a strawberry, 
was loitering, vacantly flogging the gatepost with a hazel switch. 


4 


It was a little after eleven The day, which, like some overripe but hopeful 
widow playing at seventeen, had been putting on unseasonable April airs, had 
now remembered that it was August and settled down to be boiling hot 
Dorothy rode into the hamlet of Fennelwick, a mile out of Knype Hill She 
had delivered Mrs Lewm’s corn-plaster, and was dropping in to give old Mrs 
Ptther that cutting from the Daily Mail about angelica tea for rheumatism 
The sun, burning in the cloudless sky, scorched her back through her 
gingham frock, and the dusty road quivered m the heat, and the hot, flat 
meadows, over which even at this time of year numberless larks chirruped 



A Clergyman 1 s Daughter 283 

tiresomely, were so green that it hurt your eyes to look at them It was the kind 
of day that is called ‘glorious’ by people who don’t have to work 

Dorothy leaned her bicycle against the gate of the Pithers’cottage, and took 
her handkerchief out of her bag and wiped her hands, which were sweating 
from the handle-bars In the harsh sunlight her face looked pinched and 
colourless She looked her age, and something over, at that hour of the 
morning Throughout her day-and in general it was a seventeen-hour 
day- she had regular, alternating periods of tiredness and energy, the middle of 
the morning, when she was doing the first instalment of the day’s ‘visiting’, 
was one of the tired periods 

‘Visiting’, because of the distances she had to bicycle from house to house, 
took up nearly half of Dorothy’s day Every day of her life, except on Sundays, 
she made from half a dozen to a dozen visits at parishioners’ cottages She 
penetrated into cramped interiors and sat on lumpy, dust-diffusmg chairs 
gossiping with overworked, blowsy housewives, she spent hurried half-hours 
giving a hand with the mending and the ironing, and read chapters from the 
Gospels, and readjusted bandages on ‘bad legs’, and condoled with sufferers 
from mornmg-sickness, she played nde-a-cock-horse with sour-smellmg 
children who grimed the bosom of her dress with their sticky little fingers, she 
gave advice about ailing aspidistras, and suggested names for babies, and 
drank ‘nice cups of tea’ mnumerable-for the working women always wanted 
her to have a ‘nice cup of tea’, out of the teapot endlessly stewing 

Much of it was profoundly discouraging work Few, very few, of the women 
seemed to have even a conception of the Christian life that she was trying to 
help them to lead Some of them were shy and suspicious, stood on the 
defensive, and made excuses when urged to come to Holy Communion, some 
shammed piety for the sake of the tiny sums they could wheedle out of the 
church alms box, those who welcomed her coming were for the most part the 
talkative ones, who wanted an audience for complaints about the ‘goings on’ of 
their husbands, or for endless mortuary tales (‘And he had to have glass chubes 
let into his veins,’ etc , etc ) about the revolting diseases their relatives had died 
of Quite half the women on her list, Dorothy knew, were at heart atheistical in 
a vague unreasoning way She came up against it all day long-that vague, 
blank disbelief so common in illiterate people, against which all argument is 
powerless Do what she would, she could never raise the number of regular 
communicants to more than a dozen or thereabouts Women would promise to 
communicate, keep their promise for a month or two, and then fall away With 
the younger women it was especially hopeless They would not even join the 
local branches of the church leagues that were run for their benefit-Dorothy 
was honorary secretary of three such leagues, besides being captain of the Girl 
Guides, The Band of Hope and the Companionship of Marriage languished 
almost memberless, and the Mothers’ Union only kept going because gossip 
and unlimited strong tea made the weekly sewing-parties acceptable. Yes> it 
was discouraging work, so discouraging that at times it would have seemed 
altogether futile if she had not known the sense of futility for what it ls-the 
subtlest weapon of the Devil* 



284 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

Dorothy knocked at the Pither s’ badly fitting door, from beneath which a 
melancholy smell of boiled cabbage and dish-water was oozing From long 
experience she knew and could taste in advance the individual smell of every 
cottage on her rounds Some of their smells were peculiar in the extreme For 
instance, there was the salty, feral smell that haunted the cottage of old Mr 
Tombs, an aged retired bookseller who lay in bed all day m a darkened room, 
with his long, dusty nose and pebble spectacles protruding from what 
appeared to be a fur rug of vast size and richness 

But if you put your hand on the fur rug it disintegrated, burst and fled in all 
directions It was composed entirely of cats -twenty-four cats, to be exact Mr 
Tombs ‘found they kept him warm 5 , he used to explain In nearly all the 
cottages there was a basic smell of old overcoats and dish-water upon which 
the other, individual smells were superimposed, the cesspool smell, the 
cabbage smell, the smell of children, the strong, bacon-like reek of corduroys 
impregnated with the sweat of a decade 
Mrs Pither opened the door, which invariably stuck to the jamb, and then, 
when you wrenched it open, shook the whole cottage She was a large, 
stooping, grey woman with wispy grey hair, a sacking apron, and shuffling 
carpet slippers 

‘Why, if it isn’t Miss Dorothy' 5 she exclaimed in a dreary, lifeless but not 
unaffectionate voice 

She took Dorothy between her large, gnarled hands, whose knuckles were as 
shmy as skinned onions from age and ceaseless washing up, and gave her a wet 
kiss Then she drew her into the unclean interior of the cottage 

‘Pither’s away at work. Miss,’ she announced as they got inside ‘Up to Dr 
Gaythorne’s he is, a-diggmg over the doctor’s flower-beds for him ’ 

Mr Pither was a jobbing gardener He and his wife, both of them over 
seventy, were one of the few genuinely pious couples on Dorothy’s visiting 
list Mrs Pither led a dreary, wormlike life of shuffling to and fro, with a per- 
petual crick m her neck because the door lintels were too low for her, between 
the well, the sink, the fireplace, and the tiny plot of kitchen garden The 
kitchen was decently tidy, but oppressively hot, evil-smellmg and saturated 
with ancient dust At the end opposite the fireplace Mrs Pither had made a 
kind of prie-dieu out of a greasy rag mat laid m front of a tiny, defunct 
harmonium, on top of which were an oleographed crucifixion, ‘Watch and 
Pray’ done m beadwork, and a photograph of Mr and Mrs Pither on their 
wedding day in 1882 

‘Poor Pither 1 ’ went on Mrs Pither in her depressing voice, ‘him a-diggmg at 
his age, with his rheumatism that bad 1 Ain’t it cruel hard, Miss? And he’s had a 
kind of a pam between his legs, Miss, as he can’t seem to account for -terrible 
bad he’s been with it, these last few mornings Ain’t it bitter hard. Miss, the 
lives us poor working folks has to lead?’ 

‘It’s a shame,’ said Dorothy ‘But I hope you’ve been keeping a little better 
yourself, Mrs Pither?’ 

‘Ah, Miss, there’s nothmg don’t make me better I ain’t a case for curing, 
not m this world, I ain’t I shan’t never get no better, not m this wicked 



A Clergyman's Daughter 


285 


world down here ’ 

‘Oh, you mustn’t say that, Mrs Pither 1 1 hope we shall have you with us for a 
long time yet ’ 

‘Ah, Miss, you don’t know how poorly I’ve been this last week 1 I’ve had the 
rheumatism a-commg and a-going all down the backs of my poor old legs, till 
there’s some mornings when I don’t feel as I can’t walk so far as to pull a 
handful of onions m the garden Ah, Miss, it’s a weary world we lives in, ain’t 
it, Miss? A weary, sinful world ’ 

‘But of course we must never forget, Mrs Pither, that there’s a better world 
coming This life is only a time of trial-just to strengthen us and teach us to be 
patient, so that we’ll be ready for Heaven when the time comes ’ 

At this a sudden and remarkable change came over Mrs Pither It was 
produced by the word ‘Heaven’ Mrs Pither had only two subjects of 
conversation, one of them was the joys of Heaven, and the other the miseries of 
her present state Dorothy’s remark seemed to act upon her like a charm Her 
dull grey eye was not capable of brightening, but her voice quickened with an 
almost joyful enthusiasm 

‘Ah, Miss, there you said it 1 That’s a true word. Miss' That’s what Pither 
and me keeps a-saying to ourselves And that’s just the one thing as keeps us a- 
gomg-just the thought of Heaven and the long, long rest we’ll have there 
Whatever we’ve suffered, we gets it all back in Heaven, don’t we. Miss? Every 
little bit of suffering, you gets it back a hundredfold and a thousandfold That 
is true, ain’t it. Miss? There’s rest for us all m Heaven-rest and peace and no 
more rheumatism nor digging nor cooking nor laundering nor nothing You do 
believe that, don’t you. Miss Dorothy?’ 

‘Of course,’ said Dorothy 

‘Ah, Miss, if you knew how it comforts us-just the thoughts of Heaven' 
Pither he says to me, when he comes home tired of a night and our 
rheumatism’s bad, “Never you mind, my dear,” he says, “we ain’t far off 
Heaven now,” he says “Heaven was made for the likes of us,” he says, “just 
for poor working folks like us, that have been sober and godly and kept our 
Communions regular ” That’s the best way, ain’t it, Miss Dorothy-poor m 
this life and rich m the next? Not like some of them rich folks as all their motor- 
cars and their beautiful houses won’t save from the worm that dieth not and 
the fire that’s not quenched Such a beautiful text, that is Do you think you 
could say a little prayer with me, Miss Dorothy? I been looking forward all the 
morning to a little prayer ’ 

Mrs Pither was always ready for a ‘little prayer’ at any hour of the night or 
day. It was her equivalent to a ‘nice cup of tea’ They knelt down on the rag 
mat and said the Lord’s Prayer and the Collect for the week, and then 
Dorothy, at Mrs Pither’s request, read the parable of Dives and Lazarus, Mrs 
Pither coming m from time to time with ‘Amen' That’s a true word, ain’t it. 
Miss Dorothy? “And he was carried by angels into Abraham’s bosom.” 
Beautiful' Dh, I do call that just too beautiful' Amen, Miss Dorothy- Amen!’ 

Dorothy gave Mrs Pither the cutting from the Daily Mail about angelica tea 
for rheumatism, and then, finding that Mrs Pither had been too ‘poorly’ to 



286 A Clergyman’ s Daughter 

draw the day’s supply of water, she drew three bucketfuls for her from the 
well It was a very deep well, with such a low parapet that Mrs Pither’s final 
doom would almost certainly be to fall into it and get drowned, and it had not 
even a winch- you had to haul the bucket up hand over hand And then they 
sat down for a few minutes, and Mrs Pither talked some more about Heaven It 
was extraordinary how constantly Heaven reigned m her thoughts, and more 
extraordinary yet was the actuality, the vividness with which she could see it 
The golden streets and the gates of orient pearl were as real to her as though 
they had been actually before her eyes And her vision extended to the most 
concrete, the most earthly details The softness of the beds up there! The 
deliciousness of the food' The lovely silk clothes that you would put on clean 
every morning! The surcease from everlasting to everlasting from work of any 
description' In almost every moment of her life the vision of Heaven supported 
and consoled her, and her abject complaints about the lives of ‘poor working 
folks’ were curiously tempered by a satisfaction m the thought that, after all, it 
is ‘poor working folks’ who are the principal inhabitants of Heaven It was a 
sort of bargain that she had struck, setting her lifetime of dreary labour against 
an eternity of bliss Her faith was almost too great, if that is possible For it was 
a curious fact, but the certitude with which Mrs Pither looked forward to 
Heaven-as to some kind of glorified home for mcurables-affected Dorothy 
with strange uneasiness 

Dorothy prepared to depart, while Mrs Pither thanked her, rather too 
effusively, for her visit, winding up, as usual, with fresh complaints about her 
rheumatism 

‘I’ll be sure and take the angelica tea,’ she concluded, ‘and thank you kindly 
for telling me of it. Miss Not as I don’t expect as it’ll do me much good Ah, 
Miss, if you knew how cruel bad my rheumatism’s been this last week' All 
down the backs of my legs, it is, like a regular shooting red-hot poker, and I 
don’t seem to be able to get at them to rub them properly Would it be asking 
too much of you. Miss, to give me a bit of a rub-down before you go? I got a 
bottle of Elliman’s under the sink ’ 

Unseen by Mrs Pither, Dorothy gave herself a severe pinch She had been 
expecting this, and-she had done it so many times before-she really did not 
enjoy rubbing Mrs Pither down She exhorted herself angrily Come on, 
Dorothy' No smffishness, please' John xrn, 14 ‘Of course I will, Mrs Pither 1 ’ 
she said instantly 

They went up the narrow, rickety staircase, in which you had to bend almost 
double at one place to avoid the overhanging ceiling The bedroom was lighted 
by a tiny square of window that was jammed in its socket by the creeper 
outside, and had not been opened in twenty years There was an enormous 
double bed that almost filled the room, with sheets perennially damp and a 
flock mattress as full of hills and valleys as a contour map of Switzerland With 
many groans the old woman crept on to the bed and laid herself face down 
The room reeked of urine and paregoric Dorothy took the bottle of Elliman’s 
embrocation and carefully anointed Mrs Pither’s large, grey-vemed, flaccid 
legs. 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 287 

Outside, m the swimming heat, she mounted her bicycle and began to ride 
swiftly homewards The sun burned m her face, but the air now seemed sweet 
and fresh She was happy, happy 1 She was always extravagantly happy when 
her morning’s ‘visiting’ was over, and, curiously enough, she was not aware of 
the reason for this In Borlase the dairy-farmer’s meadow the red cows were 
grazing, knee-deep in shining seas of grass The scent of cows, like a 
distillation of vanilla and fresh hay, floated into Dorothy’s nostrils Though 
she had still a morning’s work m front of her she could not resist the 
temptation to loiter for a moment, steadying her bicycle with one hand against 
the gate of Borlase’s meadow, while a cow, with moist shell-pink nose, 
scratched its chin upon the gatepost and dreamily regarded her 

Dorothy caught sight of a wild rose, flowerless of course, growing beyond 
the hedge, and climbed over the gate with the intention of discovering whether 
it were not sweetbriar She knelt down among the tall weeds beneath the 
hedge It was very hot down there, close to the ground The humming of many 
unseen insects sounded m her ears, and the hot summery fume from the 
tangled swathes of vegetation flowed up and enveloped her Near by, tall stalks 
of fennel were growing, with trailing fronds of foliage like the tails of sea-green 
horses Dorothy pulled a frond of the fennel against her face and breathed m 
the strong sweet scent Its richness overwhelmed her, almost dizzied her for a 
moment She drank it in, filling her lungs with it Lovely, lovely scent-scent of 
summer days, scent of childhood joys, scent of spice-drenched islands m the 
warm foam of Oriental seas' 

Her heart swelled with sudden joy It was that mystical joy m the beauty of 
the earth and the very nature of things that she recognized, perhaps 
mistakenly, as the love of God As she knelt there in the heat, the sweet odour 
and the drowsy hum of insects, it seemed to her that she could momentarily 
hear the mighty anthem of praise that the earth and all created things send up 
everlastingly to their maker All vegetation, leaves, flowers, grass, shining, 
vibrating, crying out in their joy Larks also chanting, choirs of larks invisible, 
dripping music from the sky All the riches of summer, the warmth of the 
earth, the song of birds, the fume of cows, the droning of countless bees, 
mingling and ascending like the smoke of ever-burning altars Therefore with 
Angels and Archangels' She began to pray, and for a moment she prayed 
ardently, blissfully, forgetting herself m the joy of her worship Then, less 
than a minute later, she discovered that she was kissing the frond of the fennel 
that was still against her face 

She checked herself instantly, and drew back What was she doing 5 Was it 
God that she was worshipping, or was it only the earth 5 The joy ebbed out of 
her heart, to be succeeded by the cold, uncomfortable feeling that she had been 
betrayed into a half-pagan ecstasy. She admonished herself None of that , 
Dorothy! No Nature-worship, please 1 Her father had warned her against 
Nature-worship She had heard him preach more than one sermon against it; it 
was, he said, mere pantheism, and, what seemed to offend him even more, a 
disgusting modem fad Dorothy took a thorn of the wild rose, and pricked her 
arm three times, to remind herself of the Three Persons of the Trinity, before 



288 A Clergyman's Daughter 

climbing over the gate and remounting her bicycle 

A black, very dusty shovel hat was approaching round the corner of the 
hedge It was Father McGuire, the Roman Catholic priest, also bicycling his 
rounds He was a very large, rotund man, so large that he dwarfed the bicycle 
beneath him and seemed to be balanced on top of it like a golf-ball on a tee His 
face was rosy, humorous, and a little sly 

Dorothy looked suddenly unhappy She turned pink, and her hand moved 
instinctively to the neighbourhood of the gold cross beneath her dress Father 
McGuire was riding towards her with an untroubled, faintly amused air She 
made an endeavour to smile, and murmured unhappily, ‘Good morning 1 But 
he rode on without a sign, his eyes swept easily over her face and then beyond 
her into vacancy, with an admirable pretence of not having noticed her 
existence It was the Cut Direct Dorothy-by nature, alas' unequal to 
delivering the Cut Direct- got on to her bicycle and rode away, struggling with 
the uncharitable thoughts which a meeting with Father McGuire never failed 
to arouse m her 

Five or six years earlier, when Father McGuire was holding a funeral in St 
Athelstan’s churchyard (there was no Roman Catholic cemetery at Knype 
Hill), there had been some dispute with the Rector about the propriety of 
Father McGuire robing in the church, or not robing in the church, and the two 
priests had wrangled disgracefully over the open grave Since then they had 
not been on speaking terms It was better so, the Rector said 

As to the other ministers of religion m Knype Hill-Mr Ward the 
Congregationalist minister, Mr Foley the Wesleyan pastor, and the braying 
bald-headed elder who conducted the orgies at Ebenezer Chapel-the Rector 
called them a pack of vulgar Dissenters and had forbidden Dorothy on pain of 
his displeasure to have anything to do with them 


5 


It was twelve o’clock In the large, dilapidated conservatory, whose roof- 
panes, from the action of time and dirt, were dim, green, and iridescent like old 
Roman glass, they were having a hurried and noisy rehearsal of Charles I 
Dorothy was not actually taking part in the rehearsal, but was busy making 
costumes She made the costumes, or most of them, for all the plays the 
schoolchildren acted- The production and stage management were m the 
hands of Victor Stone-Victor, Dorothy called him-the Church school- 
master He was a small-boned, excitable, black-haired youth of twenty-seven, 
dressed in dark sub-clerical clothes, and at this moment he was gesturing 
fiercely with a roll of manuscript at six dense-lookmg children On a long 
bench against the wall four more children were alternately practising ‘noises 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 289 

off’ by clashing fire-irons together, and squabbling over a grimy little bag of 
Spearmint Bouncers, forty a penny 

It was horribly hot in the conservatory, and there was a powerful smell of 
glue and the sour sweat of children Dorothy was kneeling on the floor, with 
her mouth full of pms and a pair of shears in her hand, rapidly slicing sheets of 
brown paper into long narrow strips The glue-pot was bubbling on an oil- 
stove beside her, behind her, on the rickety, ink-stained work-table, were a 
tangle of half-finished costumes, more sheets of brown paper, her sewing- 
machine, bundles of tow, shards of dry glue, wooden swords, and open pots of 
paint With half her mmd Dorothy was meditating upon the two pairs of 
seventeenth-century jackboots that had got to be made for Charles I and 
Oliver Cromwell, and with the other half listening to the angry shouts of 
Victor, who was working himself up into a rage, as he invariably did at 
rehearsals He was a natural actor, and withal thoroughly bored by the 
drudgery of rehearsing half-witted children He strode up and down, 
haranguing the children m a vehement slangy style, and every now and then 
breaking off to lunge at one or other of them with a wooden sword that he had 
grabbed from the table 

Tut a bit of life into it, can’t you 5 ’ he cried, plodding an ox-faced boy of 
eleven in the belly ‘Don’t drone 1 Say it as if it meant something' You look like 
a corpse that’s been buried and dug up again What’s the good of gurgling it 
down m your inside like that 5 Stand up and shout at him Take off that second 
murderer expression' 5 

‘Come here, Percy' 5 cried Dorothy through her pins ‘Quick 1 ’ 

She was making the armour-the worst job of the lot, except those wretched 
jackboots-out of glue and brown paper From long practice Dorothy could 
make very nearly anything out of glue and brown paper, she could even make a 
passably good periwig, with a brown paper skull-cap and dyed tow for the hair 
Taking the year through, the amount of time she spent m struggling with glue, 
brown paper, butter muslin, and all the other paraphernalia of amateur 
theatricals was enormous So chronic was the need of money for all the church 
funds that hardly a month ever passed when there was not a school play or a 
pageant or an exhibition of tableaux vivants on hand-not to mention the 
bazaars and jumble sales 

As Percy-Percy Jowett, the blacksmith’s son, a small curly-headed boy-got 
down from the bench and stood wriggling unhappily before her, Dorothy 
seized a sheet of brown paper, measured it against him, snipped out the 
neckhole and armholes, draped it round his middle and rapidly pinned it into 
the shape of a rough breastplate There was a confused dm of voices. 

victor Come on, now, come on! Enter Oliver Cromwell-that’s you! No, not 
like that' Do you think Oliver Cromwell would come slinking on like a dog 
that’s just had a hiding? Stand up. Stick your chest out. Scowl. That’s 
better Now go on, Cromwell : ‘Halt! I hold a pistol m my hand!’ Go on 
a girl’ Please, Miss, Mother said as I was to tell you, Miss- 
dorothy Keep still, Percy' For goodness’ sake keep still' 



290 A Clergyman's Daughter 

cromwell ’Alt' I ’old a pistol in my ’and 1 

a small girl on the bench Mister' I’ve dropped my sweetie' [Snivelling] I’ve 
dropped by swee-e-e-etie' 
victor No, no, no, Tommie' No, no, no' 

the girl Please, Miss, Mother said as I was to tell you as she couldn’t make 
my knickers like she promised, Miss, because- 
dorothy You’ll make me swallow a pin if you do that again 
cromwell i/alt' I hold a pistol - 
the small girl [in tears] My swee-e-e-e-eetie' 

Dorothy seized the glue-brush, and with feverish speed pasted strips of 
brown paper all over Percy’s thorax, up and down, backwards and forwards, 
one on top of another, pausing only when the paper stuck to her fingers In five 
minutes she had made a cuirass of glue and brown paper stout enough, when it 
was dry, to have defied a real sword-blade Percy, ‘locked up in complete steel’ 
and with the sharp paper edge cutting his chin, looked down at himself with 
the miserable resigned expression of a dog having its bath Dorothy took the 
shears, slit the breastplate up one side, set it on end to dry and started 
immediately on another child A fearful clatter broke out as the ‘noises off 
began practising the sound of pistol-shots and horses galloping Dorothy’s 
fingers were getting stickier and stickier, but from time to time she washed 
some of the glue off them in a bucket of hot water that was kept- in readiness In 
twenty minutes she had partially completed three breastplates Later on they 
would have to be finished off, painted over with aluminium paint and laced up 
the sides, and after that there was the job of making the thigh-pieces, and, 
worst of all, the helmets to go with them Victor, gesticulating with his sword 
and shouting to overcome the dm of galloping horses, was personating m turn 
Oliver Cromwell, Charles I, Roundheads, Cavaliers, peasants, and Court 
ladies The children were now growing restive and beginning to yawn, whine, 
and exchange furtive kicks and pinches The breastplates finished for the 
moment, Dorothy swept some of the litter off the table, pulled her sewing- 
machine into position and set to work on a Cavalier’s green velvet doublet-it 
was butter muslin Twmked green, but it looked all right at a distance 
There was another ten minutes of feverish work Dorothy broke her thread, 
all but said ‘Damn 1 ’ checked herself and hurriedly re-threaded the needle She 
was working against time The play was now a fortnight distant, and there was 
such a multitude of things yet to be made-helmets, doublets, swords, 
jackboots (those miserable jackboots had been haunting her like a nightmare 
for days past), scabbards, ruffles, wigs, spurs, scenery-that her heart sank 
when she thought of them The children’s parents never helped with the 
costumes for the school plays, more exactly, they always promised to help and 
then backed out afterwards, Dorothy’s head was aching diabolically, partly 
from the heat of the conservatory, partly from the strain of simultaneously 
sewing and trying to visualize patterns for brown paper jackboots For the 
moment she had even forgotten the bill for twenty-one pounds seven and 
nmepence at Cargill’s She could think of nothing save that fearful mountain 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 291 

of unmade clothes that lay ahead of her It was so throughout the day One 
thing loomed up after another- whether it was the costumes for the school play 
or the collapsing floor of the belfry, or the shop -debts or the bindweed in the 
peas-and each in its turn so urgent and so harassing that it blotted all the 
others out of existence 

Victor threw down his wooden sword, took out his watch and looked at it 
‘That’ll do 1 ’ he said m the abrupt, ruthless tone from which he never 
departed when he was dealing with children ‘We’ll go on on Friday Clear out, 
the lot of you 1 I’m sick of the sight of you ’ 

He watched the children out, and then, having forgotten their existence as 
soon as they were out of his sight, produced a page of music from his pocket 
and began to fidget up and down, cocking his eye at two forlorn plants m the 
corner which trailed their dead brown tendrils over the edges of their pots 
Dorothy was still bending over her machine, stitching up the seams of the 
green velvet doublet 

Victor was a restless, intelligent little creature, and only happy when he was 
quarrelling with somebody or something His pale, fine-featured face wore an 
expression that appeared to be discontent and was really boyish eagerness 
People meeting him for the first time usually said that he was wasting his 
talents in his obscure job as a village schoolmaster, but the truth was that 
Victor had no very marketable talents except a slight gift for music and a much 
more pronounced gift for dealing with children Ineffectual m other ways, he 
was excellent with children, he had the proper, ruthless attitude towards them 
But of course, like everyone else, he despised his own especial talent His 
interests were almost purely ecclesiastical He was what people call a churchy 
young man It had always been his ambition to enter the Church, and he would 
actually have done so if he had possessed the kind of brain that is capable of 
learning Greek and Hebrew Debarred from the priesthood, he had drifted 
quite naturally into his position as a Church schoolmaster and organist It kept 
him, so to speak, within the Church precincts Needless to say, he was an 
Anglo-Catholic of the most truculent Church Times breed-more clerical than 
the clerics, knowledgeable about Church history, expert on vestments, and 
ready at any moment with a furious tirade against Modernists, Protestants, 
scientists, Bolshevists, and atheists 

‘I was thinking,’ said Dorothy as she stopped her machine and snipped off 
the thread, ‘we might make those helmets out of old bowler hats, if we can get 
hold of enough of them Cut the brims off, put on paper brims of the right 
shape and silver them over ’ 

‘Oh Lord, why worry your head about such things?’ said Victor, who had 
lost interest m the play the moment the rehearsal was over 

‘It’s those wretched jackboots that are worrying me the most,’ said Dorothy, 
taking the doublet on to her knee and looking at it 
‘Oh, bother the jackboots 1 Let’s stop thinking about the play for a moment. 
Look here,’ said Victor, unrolling his page of music, ‘I want you to speak to 
your father for me I wish you’d ask him whether we can’t have a procession 
some time next month ’ 



292 A Clergyman ’s Daughter 

‘Another procession? What for?’ 

‘Oh, I don’t know You can always find an excuse for a procession There’s 
the Nativity of the B V M coming off on the eighth-that’s good enough for a 
procession, I should think We’ll do it in style I’ve got hold of a splendid 
rousing hymn that they can all bellow, and perhaps we could borrow their blue 
banner with the Virgin Mary on it from St Wedekind’s in Millborough If he’ll 
say the word I’ll start practising the choir at once ’ 

‘You know he’ll only say no,’ said Dorothy, threading a needle to sew 
buttons on the doublet ‘He doesn’t really approve of processions It’s much 
better not to ask him and make him angry ’ 

‘Oh, but dash it all'’ protested Victor ‘It’s simply months since we’ve had a 
procession I never saw such dead-alive services as we have here You’d think 
we were a Baptist chapel or something, from the way we go on ’ 

Victor chafed ceaselessly against the dull correctness of the Rector’s 
services His ideal was what he called ‘the real Catholic worship ’-meaning 
unlimited incense, gilded images, and more Roman vestments In his capacity 
of organist he was for ever pressing for more processions, more voluptuous 
music, more elaborate chanting in the liturgy, so that it was a continuous pull 
devil, pull baker between him and the Rector And on this point Dorothy sided 
with her father Having been brought up in the peculiar, frigid via media of 
Anglicanism, she was by nature averse to and half-afraid of anything 
‘ritualistic’ 

‘But dash it all*’ went on Victor, ‘a procession is such fun' Down the aisle, 
out through the west door and back through the south door, with the choir 
carrying candles behind and the Boy Scouts in front with the banner It would 
look fine ’ He sang a stave in a thin but tuneful tenor 
‘Hail thee. Festival Day, blest day that art hallowed for ever 1 ’ 

‘If I had my way,’ he added, ‘I’d have a couple of boys swinging jolly good 
censers of incense at the same time ’ 

‘Yes, but you know how much Father dislikes that kind of thing Especially 
when it’s anything to do with the Virgin Mary He says it’s all Roman Fever 
and leads to people crossing themselves and genuflecting at the wrong times 
and goodness knows what You remember what happened at Advent ’ 

The previous year, on his own responsibility, Victor had chosen as one of 
the hymns for Advent, Number 642, with the refrain ‘Hail Mary, hail Mary, 
hail Mary full of grace*’ This piece of popishness had annoyed the Rector 
extremely At the close of the first verse he had pointedly laid down his hymn 
book, turned round in his stall and stood regarding the congregation with an 
air so stony that some of the choirboys faltered and almost broke down 
Afterwards he had said that to hear the rustics bawling ‘’Ail Mary' ’Ail Mary*’ 
made him think he was m the four-ale bar of the Dog and Bottle 

‘But dash it'’ said Victor m his aggrieved way, ‘your father always puts his 
foot down when I try and get a bit of life into the service He won’t allow us 
mcense, or decent music, or proper vestments, or anything And what’s the 
result? We can’t get enough people to fill the church a quarter full, even on 
Easter Sunday You look round the church on Sunday morning, and it’s 



A Clei gyman’ s Daughter 293 

nothing but the Boy Scouts and the Girl Guides and a few old women ’ 

‘I know It’s dreadful,’ admitted Dorothy, sewing on her button ‘It doesn’t 
seem to make any difference what we do- we simply can’t get the people to 
come to church Still,’ she added, ‘they do come to us to be married and 
buried And I don’t think the congregation’s actually gone down this year 
There were nearly two hundred people at Easter Communion ’ 

‘Two hundred* It ought to be two thousand That’s the population of this 
town The fact is that three quarters of the people in this place never go near a 
church in their lives The Church has absolutely lost its hold over them They 
don’t know that it exists And why’ That’s what I’m getting at Why’’ 

‘I suppose it’s all this Science and Free Thought and all that,’ said Dorothy 
rather sententiously, quoting her father 
This remark deflected Victor from what he had been about to say He had 
been on the very point of saying that St Athelstan’s congregation had dwindled 
because of the dullness of the services, but the hated words of Science and Free 
Thought set him off in another and even more familiar channel 
‘Of course it’s this so-called Free Thought*’ he exclaimed, immediately 
beginning to fidget up and down again ‘It’s these swine of atheists like 
Bertrand Russell and Julian Huxley and all that crowd And what’s ruined the 
Church is that instead of jolly well answering them and showing them up for 
the fools and liars they are, we just sit tight and let them spread their beastly 
atheist propaganda wherever they choose It’s all the fault of the bishops, of 
course ’ (Like every Anglo-Catholic, Victor had an abysmal contempt for 
bishops ) ‘They’re all Modernists and time-servers By Jove*’ he added more 
cheerfully, halting, ‘did you see my letter m the Church Times last week’’ 
‘No, I’m afraid I didn’t,’ said Dorothy, holding another button m position 
with her thumb ‘What was it about’’ 

‘Oh, Modernist bishops and all that I got m a good swipe at old Barnes ’ 

It was very rarely that a week passed when Victor did not write a letter to the 
Church Times He was m the thick of every controversy and in the forefront of 
every assault qpon Modernists and atheists He had twice been in combat with 
Dr Major, had written letters of withering irony about Dean Inge and the 
Bishop of Birmingham, and had not hesitated to attack even the fiendish 
Russell himself-but Russell, of course, had not dared to reply Dorothy, to tell 
the truth, very seldom read the Church Times, and the Rector grew angry if he 
so much as saw a copy of it m the house The weekly paper they took in the 
Rectory was the High Churchman’s Gazette -a fine old High Tory anachronism 
with a small and select circulation 

‘That swine Russell*’ said Victor reminiscently, with his hands deep m his 
pockets ‘How he does make my blood boil*’ 

‘Isn’t that the man who’s such a clever mathematician, or something’’ said 
Dorothy, biting off her thread 

‘Oh, I dare say he’s clever enough in his own line, of course,’ admitted 
Victor grudgingly ‘But what’s that got to do with it’ Just because a man’s 
clever at figures it doesn’t mean to say that- well, anyway* Let’s come back to 
what I was saying. Why is it that we can’t get people to come to church in this 



294 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

placed It’s because our services are so dreary and godless, that’s what it is 
People want worship that is worship-they want the real Catholic worship of 
the real Catholic Church we belong to And they don’t get if from us All they 
get is the old Protestant mumbo-jumbo, and Protestantism’s as dead as a 
doornail, and everyone knows it ’ 

‘That’s not true 1 ’ said Dorothy rather sharply as she pressed the third 
button into place ‘You know we’re not Protestants Father’s always saying 
that the Church of England is the Catholic Church-he’s preached I don’t 
know how many sermons about the Apostolic Succession That’s why Lord 
Pockthorne and the others won’t come to church here Only he won’t join m 
the Anglo-Catholic movement because he thinks they’re too fond of ritualism 
for its own sake And so do I ’ 

‘Oh, I don’t say your father isn’t absolutely sound on doctrme-absolutely 
sound But if he thinks we’re the Catholic Church, why doesn’t he hold the 
service in a proper Catholic way? It’s a shame we can’t have incense 
occasionally And his ideas about vestments-if you don’t mmd my saying 
lt-are simply awful On Easter Sunday he was wearing a Gothic cope with a 
modern Italian lace alb Dash it, it’s like wearing a top hat with brown boots ’ 

‘Well, I don’t think vestments are so important as you do,’ said Dorothy ‘I 
think it’s the spirit of the priest that matters, not the clothes he wears ’ 

‘That’s the kind of thing a Primitive Methodist would say 1 ’ exclaimed 
Victor disgustedly ‘Of course vestments are important 1 Where’s the sense of 
worshipping at all if we can’t make a proper job of it? Now, if you want to see 
what real Catholic worship can be like, look at St Wedekind’s m Millborough' 
By Jove, they do things in style there 1 Images of the Virgin, reservation of the 
Sacrament-everythmg They’ve had the Kensitites on to them three times, 
and they simply defy the Bishop ’ 

‘Oh, I hate the way they go on at St Wedekind’s 1 ’ said Dorothy ‘They’re 
absolutely spiky You can hardly see what’s happening at the altar, there are 
such clouds of incense I think people like that ought to turn Roman Catholic 
and have done with it ’ 

‘My dear Dorothy, you ought to have been a Nonconformist You really 
ought A Plymouth Brother-or a Plymouth Sister or whatever it’s called I 
think your favourite hymn must be Number 567, “O my God I fear Thee, 
Thou art very High 1 ” ’ 

‘Yours is Number 231, “I nightly pitch my moving tent a day’s march 
nearer Rome*’” retorted Dorothy, winding the thread round the last button 

The argument continued for several minutes while Dorothy adorned a 
Cavalier’s beaver hat (it was an old black felt school hat of her own) with plume 
and ribbons She and Victor were never long together without being involved 
in an argument upon the question of ‘ritualism’ In Dorothy’s opinion Victor 
was a kind to ‘go over to Rome’ if not prevented, and she was very likely right 
But Victor was not yet aware of his probable destiny At present the fevers of 
the Anglo-Catholic movement, with its ceaseless exciting warfare on three 
fronts at once-Protestants to right of you, Modernists to the left of you, and, 
unfortunately, Roman Catholics to rear of you and always ready for a sly kick 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 293 

in the pants-filled his mental horizon Scoring off Dr Major m the Church 
Times meant more to him than any of the serious business of life But for all his 
churchmess he had not an atom of real piety m his constitution It was 
essentially as a game that religious controversy appealed to him-the most 
absorbing game ever invented, because it goes on for ever and because just a 
little cheating is allowed 

‘Thank goodness, that’s done 1 ’ said Dorothy, twiddling the Cavalier’s 
beaver hat round on her hand and then putting it down ‘Oh dear, what piles of 
things there are still to do, though' I wish I could get those wretched jackboots 
off my mind What’s the time, Victor’’ 

‘It’s nearly five to one ’ 

‘Oh, good gracious 1 I must run I’ve got three omelettes to make I daren’t 
trust them to Ellen And, oh, Victor' Have you got anything you can give us for 
the jumble sale’ If you had an old pair of trousers you could give us, that would 
be best of all, because we can always sell trousers ’ 

‘Trousers’ No But I tell you what I have got, though I’ve got a copy of The 
Pilgrim’s Progress and another of Foxe’s Book of Martyrs that I’ve been 
wanting to get rid of for years Beastly Protestant trash' An old Dissenting aunt 
of mine gave them to me -Doesn’t it make you sick, all this cadging for 
pennies’ Now, if we only held our services m a proper Catholic way, so that we 
could get up a proper congregation, don’t you see, we shouldn’t need-’ 

‘That’ll be splendid,’ said Dorothy ‘We always have a stall for books-we 
charge a penny for each book, and nearly all of them get sold We simply must 
make that jumble sale a success, Victor' I’m countmg on Miss Mayfill to give 
us something really nice What I’m specially hoping is that she might give us 
that beautiful old Lowestoft china tea service of hers, and we could sell it for 
five pounds at least I’ve been making special prayers all the morning that 
she’ll give it to us ’ 

‘Oh’’ said Victor, less enthusiastically than usual Like Proggett earlier m 
the morning, he was embarrassed by the word ‘prayer’ He was ready to talk all 
day long about a point of ritual, but the mention of private devotions struck 
him as slightly indecent ‘Don’t forget to ask your father about the procession,’ 
he said, getting back to a more congenial topic 

‘All right. I’ll ask him But you know how it’ll be He’ll only get annoyed and 
say it’s Roman Fever ’ 

‘Oh, damn Roman Fever' 5 said Victor, who, unlike Dorothy, did not set 
himself penances for swearing 

Dorothy hurried to the kitchen, discovered that there were only five eggs to 
make the omelettes for three people, and decided to make one large omelette and 
swell it out a bit with the cold boiled potatoes left over from yesterday. With a 
short prayer for the success of the omelette (for omelettes are so dreadfully apt 
to get broken when you take them out of the pan), she whipped up the eggs, 
while Victor made off down the drive, half wistfully and half sulkily humming 
‘Hail thee, Festival Day’, and passing on his way a disgusted-lookmg 
manservant carrying the two handleless chamber-pots which were Miss 
May fill’s contribution to the jumble sale 



6 


It was a little after ten o’clock Various things had happened-nothmg, 
however, of any particular importance, only the usual round of parish jobs that 
filled up Dorothy’s afternoon and evening Now, as she had arranged earlier in 
the day, she was at Mr Warburton’s house, and was trying to hold her own in 
one of those meandering arguments in which he delighted to entangle her 
They were talking-but indeed, Mr Warburton never failed to manoeuvre 
the conversation towards this subject-about the question of religious belief 
‘My dear Dorothy,’ he was saying argumentatively, as he walked up and 
down with one hand in his coat pocket and the other manipulating a Brazilian 
cigar ‘My dear Dorothy, you don’t seriously mean to tell me that at your 
age-twenty-seven, I believe-and with your intelligence, you will retain your 
religious beliefs more or less in toto > ’ 

‘Of course I do You know I do ’ 

‘Oh, come, now 1 The whole bag of tricks? All that nonsense that you learned 
at your mother’s knee-surely you’re not going to pretend to me that you still 
believe m it? But of course you don’t 1 You can’t 1 You’re afraid to own up, 
that’s all it is No need to worry about that here, you know The Rural Dean’s 
wife isn’t listening, and / won’t give the show away ’ 

‘I don’t know what you mean by “all that nonsense”/ began Dorothy, sitting 
up straighter m her chair, a little offended 

‘Well, let’s take an instance Something particularly hard to swallow-Hell, 
for instance Do you believe in Hell? When I say believe , mind you. I’m not 
asking whether you believe it m some milk and water metaphorical way like 
these Modernist bishops young Victor Stone gets so excited about I mean do 
you believe in it literally? Do you believe m Hell as you believe m Australia?’ 
‘Yes, of course I do,’ said Dorothy, and she endeavoured to explain to him 
that the existence of Hell is much more real and permanent than the existence 
of Australia 

‘Hm,’ said Mr Warburton, unimpressed ‘Very sound in its way, of course 
But what always makes me so suspicious of you religious people is that you’re 
so deucedly cold-blooded about your beliefs It shows a very poor imagination, 
to say the least of it Here am I an mfidel and blasphemer and neck deep m at 
least six out of the Seven Deadly, and obviously doomed to eternal torment 
There’s no knowing that in an hour’s time I mayn’t be roasting in the hottest 
part of Hell And yet you can sit there talking to me as calmly as though I’d 
nothing the matter with me Now, if I’d merely got cancer or leprosy or some 



A Clergyman's Daughter 297 

other bodily ailment, you’d be quite distressed about lt-at least, I like to flatter 
myself that you would Whereas, when I’m going to sizzle on the grid 
throughout eternity, you seem positively unconcerned about it ’ 

‘I never said you were going to Hell,’ said Dorothy somewhat 
uncomfortably, and wishing that the conversation would take a different turn 
For the truth was, though she was not gomg to tell him so, that the point Mr 
Warburton had raised was one with which she herself had had certain 
difficulties She did indeed believe in Hell, but she had never been able to 
persuade herself that anyone actually went there She believed that Hell 
existed, but that it was empty Uncertain of the orthodoxy of this belief, she 
preferred to keep it to herself ‘It’s never certain that anyone is gomg to Hell,’ 
she said more firmly, feeling that here at least she was on sure ground 
‘What 1 ’ said Mr Warburton, halting m mock surprise ‘Surely you don’t 
mean to say that there’s hope for me yet’’ 

‘Of course there is It’s only those horrid Predestination people who pretend 
that you go to Hell whether you repent or not You don’t think the Church of 
England are Calvinists, do you’’ 

‘I suppose there’s always the chance of getting off on a plea of Invincible 
Ignorance,’ said Mr Warburton reflectively, and then, more confidently ‘Do 
you know, Dorothy, I’ve a sort of feeling that even now, after knowing me two 
years, you’ve still half an idea you can make a convert of me A lost 
sheep-brand plucked from the burning, and all that I believe you still hope 
against hope that one of these days my eyes will be opened and you’ll meet me 
at Holy Communion at seven o’clock on some damned cold winter morning 
Don’t you’’ 

‘Well-’ said Dorothy, again uncomfortably She did, m fact, entertain some 
such hope about Mr Warburton, though he was not exactly a promising case 
for conversion It was not in her nature to see a fellow being m a state of 
unbelief without making some effort to reclaim him What hours she had 
spent, at different times, earnestly debating with vague village atheists who 
could not produce a single intelligible reason for their unbelief 1 ‘Yes,’ she 
admitted finally, not particularly wanting to make the admission, but not 
wanting to prevaricate 
Mr Warburton laughed delightedly. 

‘You’ve a hopeful nature,’ he said ‘But you aren’t afraid, by any chance, that 
I might convert you? “The dog it was that died”, you may remember ’ 

At this Dorothy merely smiled ‘Don’t let him see he’s shocking you’-that 
was always her maxim when she was talking to Mr Warburton. They had been 
arguing m this manner, without coming to any kmd of conclusion, for the past 
hour, and might have gone on for the rest of the night if Dorothy had been 
willing to stay, for Mr Warburton delighted in teasing her about her religious 
beliefs He had that fatal cleverness that so often goes with unbelief, and in 
their arguments, though Dorothy was always right, she was not Sways 
victorious They were sitting, or rather Dorothy was sitting and Mr 
Warburton was standing, m a large agreeable room, giving on a moonlit lawn, 
that Mr Warburton called his ‘studio’ -not that there was any sign of work ever 



2^8 A Clergyman's Daughter 

having been done in it To Dorothy’s great disappointment, the celebrated Mr 
Bewley had not turned up (As a matter of fact, neither Mr Bewley, nor his 
wife, nor his novel entitled Fishpools and Concubines , actually existed Mr 
Warburton had invented all three of them on the spur of the moment, as a 
pretext for inviting Dorothy to his house, well knowing that she would never 
come unchaperoned ) Dorothy had felt rather uneasy on finding that Mr 
Warburton was alone It had occurred to her, indeed she had felt perfectly 
certain, that it would be wiser to go home at once, but she had stayed, chiefly 
because she was horribly tired and the leather armchair into which Mr 
Warburton had thrust her the moment she entered the house was too 
comfortable to leave Now, however, her conscience was pricking her It didn't 
do to stay too late at his house-people would talk if they heard of it Besides, 
there was a multitude of jobs that she ought to be doing and that she had 
neglected in order to come here She was so little used to idleness that even an 
hour spent m mere talking seemed to her vaguely sinful 

She made an effort, and straightened herself in the too-comfortable chair C I 
think, if you don’t mind, it’s really time I was getting home,’ she said 

‘Talking of Invincible Ignorance,’ went on Mr Warburton, taking no notice 
of Dorothy’s remark, ‘I forget whether I ever told you that once when I was 
standing outside the World’s End pub m Chelsea, waiting for a taxi, a damned 
ugly little Salvation Army lassie came up to me and said-without any kind of 
introduction, you know-“What will you say at the Judgement Seat?” I said, 
“I am reserving my defence ” Rather neat, I think, don’t you?’ 

Dorothy did not answer Her conscience had given her another and harder 
jab-she had remembered those wretched, unmade jackboots, and the fact that 
at least one of them had got to be made tonight She was, however, unbearably 
tired She had had an exhausting afternoon, starting off with ten miles or so 
bicycling to and fro in the sun, delivering the parish magazine, and continuing 
with the Mothers’ Union tea in the hot little wooden-walled room behind the 
parish hall The Mothers met every Wednesday afternoon to have tea and do 
some charitable sewing while Dorothy read aloud to them (At present she was 
reading Gene Stratton Porter’s A Girl of the Limberlosl ) It was nearly always 
upon Dorothy that jobs of that kind devolved, because the phalanx of devoted 
women (the church fowls, they are called) who do the dirty work of most 
parishes had dwindled at Knype Hill to four or five at most The only helper on 
whom Dorothy ^ould count at all regularly was Miss Foote, a tall, rabbit- 
faced, dithering virgin of thirty-five, who meant well but made a mess of 
everything and was in a perpetual state of flurry Mr Warburton used to say 
that she reminded him of a comet- ‘a ridiculous blunt-nosed creature rushing 
round on an eccentric orbit and always a little behind time’ You could trust 
Miss Foote with the church decorations, but not with the Mothers or the 
Sunday School, because, though a regular churchgoer, her orthodoxy was 
suspect She had confided to Dorothy that she could worship God best under 
the blue dome of the sky After tea Dorothy had dashed up to the church to put 
fresh flowers on the altar, and then she had typed out her father’s sermon-her 
typewriter was a rickety pre-Boer War ‘invisible’, on which you couldn’t 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 299 

average eight hundred words an hour-and after supper she had weeded the 
pea rows until the light failed and her back seemed to be breaking With one 
thing and another, she was even more tired than usual 
‘I really must be getting home,’ she repeated more firmly ‘I’m sure it’s 
getting fearfully late ’ 

‘Home?’ said Mr Warburton ‘Nonsense' The evening’s hardly begun ’ 

He was walking up and down the room again, with his hands in his coat 
pockets, having thrown away his cigar The spectre of the unmade jackboots 
stalked back into Dorothy’s mind She would, she suddenly decided, make two 
jackboots tonight instead of only one, as a penance for the hour she had wasted 
She was just beginning to make a mental sketch of the way she would cut out 
the pieces of brown paper for the msteps, when she noticed that Mr 
Warburton had halted behind her chair 
‘What time is it, do you know?’ she said 

‘I dare say it might be half past ten But people like you and me don’t talk of 
such vulgar subjects as the time ’ 

‘If it’s half past ten, then I really must be going,’ said Dorothy I’ve got a 
whole lot of work to do before I go to bed ’ 

‘Work' At this time of night? Impossible'’ 

‘Yes, I have I’ve got to make a pair of jackboots ’ 

‘You’ve got to make a pair of what? said Mr Warburton 
‘Of jackboots For the play the schoolchildren are acting We make them out 
of glue and brown paper ’ 

‘Glue and brown paper' Good God 1 ’ murmured Mr Warburton He went 
on, chiefly to cover the fact that he was drawing nearer to Dorothy’s chair 
‘What a life you lead' Messing about with glue and brown paper m the middle 
of the night' I must say, there are times when I feel just a little glad that I’m not 
a clergyman’s daughter ’ 

‘I think-’ began Dorothy 

But at the same moment Mr Warburton, invisible behind her chair, had 
lowered his hands and taken her gently by the shoulders Dorothy immediately 
wriggled herself m an effort to get free of him, but Mr Warburton pressed her 
back into her place 
‘Keep still,’ he said peaceably 
‘Let me go'’ exclaimed Dorothy 

Mr Warburton ran his right hand caressingly down her upper arm There 
was something very revealing, very characteristic in the way he did it, it was 
the lingering, appraising touch of a man to whom a woman’s body is valuable 
precisely m the same way as though it were something to eat 

‘You really have extraordinary nice arms,’ he said ‘How on earth have you 
managed to remain unmarried all these years?’ 

‘Let me go at once'’ repeated Dorothy, beginning to struggle again 
‘But I don’t particularly want to let you go,’ objected Mr Warburton 
* Please don’t stroke my arm like that' I don’t like it' 5 
‘What a curious child you are' Why don’t you like it? 5 
‘I tell you I don’t like it' 5 



yoo A Clergyman ’ ? Daughtei 

‘Now don’t go and turn round,’ said Mr Warburton mildly ‘ Y ou don’t seem 
to realize how tactful it was on my part to approach you from behind your 
back If you turn round you’ll see that I’m old enough to be your father, and 
hideously bald into the bargain But if you’ll only keep still and not look at me 
you can imagine I’m Ivor Novello ’ 

Dorothy caught sight of the hand that was caressing her- a large, pink, ver> 
masculine hand, with thick fingers and a fleece of gold hairs upon the back She 
turned very pale, the expression of her face altered from mere annoyance to 
aversion and dread She made a violent effort, wrenched herself free, and stood 
up, facing him 

‘I do wish you wouldn’t do that 1 ’ she said, half in anger and half in distress 
‘What is the matter with you’’ said Mr Warburton 

He had stood upright, in his normal pose, entirely unconcerned, and he 
looked at her with a touch of curiosity Her face had changed It was not only 
that she had turned pale, there was a withdrawn, half-frightened look in her 
eyes-almost as though, for the moment, she were looking at him with the eyes 
of a stranger He perceived that he had wounded her m some way which he did 
not understand, and which perhaps she did not want him to understand 
‘What is the matter with you’’ he repeated 
'Why must you do that every time you meet me’’ 

“‘Every time I meet you” is an exaggeration,’ said Mr Warburton ‘It’s 
really very seldom that I get the opportunity But if you really and truly don’t 
like it-’ 

‘Of course I don’t like it' You know I don’t like it 1 ’ 

‘Well, well 1 Then let’s say no more about it,’ said Mr Warburton 
generously ‘Sit down, and we’ll change the subject ’ 

He was totally devoid of shame It was perhaps his most outstanding 
characteristic Having attempted to seduce her, and failed, he was quite willing 
to go on with the conversation as though nothing whatever had happened 
‘I’m going home at once,’ said Dorothy ‘I can’t stay here any longer ’ 

‘Oh nonsense 1 Sit down and forget about it We’ll talk of moral theology, or 
cathedral architecture, or the Girl Guides’ cooking classes, or anything you 
choose Think how bored I shall be all alone if you go home at this hour ’ 

But Dorothy persisted, and there was an argument Even if it had not been 
his intention to make love to her-and whatever he might promise he would 
certainly begin again m a few minutes if she did not go-Mr Warburton would 
have pressed her to stay, for, like all thoroughly idle people, he had a horror of 
going to bed and no conception of the value of time He would, if you let him, 
keep you talking till three or four m the morning Even when Dorothy finally 
escaped, he walked beside her down the moonlit drive, still talking 
voluminously and with such perfect good humour that she found it impossible 
to be angry with him any longer 

‘I’m leaving first thing tomorrow,’ he told her as they reached the gate ‘I’m 
going to take the car to town and pick up the kids- the bastards, , you know- and 
we’re leaving for France the next day I’m not certain where we shall go after 
that, eastern Europe, perhaps Prague, Vienna, Bucharest ’ 



A Clergyman" s Daughter 301 

‘How nice,’ said Dorothy 

Mr Warburton, with an adroitness surprising m so large and stout a man, 
had manoeuvred himself between Dorothy and the gate 
‘I shall be away six months or more,’ he said ‘And of course I needn’t ask, 
before so long a parting, whether you want to kiss me good-bye ? ’ 

Before she knew what he was doing he had put his arm about her and drawn 
her against him She drew back-too late, he kissed her on the cheek-would 
have kissed her on the mouth if she had not turned her head away in time She 
struggled in his arms, violently and for a moment helplessly 
‘Oh, let me go'’ she cried ‘ Do let me go!’ 

‘I believe I pointed out before,’ said Mr Warburton, holding her easily 
against him, ‘that I don’t want to let you go ’ 

‘But we’re standing right m front of Mrs SemprilPs window' She’ll see us 
absolutely for certain'’ 

‘Oh, good God' So she will 1 ’ said Mr Warburton ‘I was forgetting ’ 
Impressed by this argument, as he would not have been by any other, he let 
Dorothy go She promptly put the gate between Mr Warburton and herself 
He, meanwhile, was scrutinizing Mrs Sempnll’s windows 

‘I can’t see a light anywhere,’ he said finally ‘With any luck the blasted hag 
hasn’t seen us ’ 

‘Good-bye,’ said Dorothy briefly ‘This time I really must go Remember me 
to the children ’ 

With this she made off as fast as she could go without actually running, to get 
out of his reach before he should attempt to kiss her again 

Even as she did so a sound checked her for an mstant-the unmistakable 
bang of a window shutting, somewhere in Mrs Semprill’s house Could Mrs 
Semprill have been watching them after alP But (reflected Dorothy) of course 
she had been watching them' What else could you expect^ You could hardly 
imagine Mrs Semprill missing such a scene as that And if she had been 
watching them, undoubtedly the story would be all over the town tomorrow 
morning, and it would lose nothing in the telling But this thought, sinister 
though it was, did no more than flight momentarily through Dorothy’s mind as 
she hurried down the road 

When she was well out of sight of Mr Warburton’s house she stopped, took 
out her handkerchief and scrubbed the place on her cheek where he had kissed 
her She scrubbed it vigorously enough to bring the blood into her cheek It 
was not until she had quite rubbed out the imaginary stam which his bps had 
left there that she walked on again 

What he had done had upset her Even now her heart was knocking and 
fluttering uncomfortably I can’t hear that kind of thing' she repeated to herself 
several times over And unfortunately this was no more than the literal truth, 
she really could not bear it To be kissed or fondled by a man- to feel heavy 
male arms about her and thick male lips bearing down upon her own-was 
terrifying and repulsive to her Even m memory or imagination it made her 
wmce It was her especial secret, the especial, incurable disability that she 
carried through life 



go 2 A Clergyman 3 s Daughter 

If only they would leave you alone ] she thought as she walked onwards a 
little more slowly That was how she put it to herself habitually- ‘If only they 
would leave you alone '’ For it was not that m other ways she disliked men On 
the contrary, she liked them better than women Part of Mr Warburton’s hold 
over her was m the fact that he was a man and had the careless good humour 
and the intellectual largeness that women so seldom have But why couldn’t 
they leave you alone > Why did they always have to kiss you and maul you 
about’ They were dreadful when they kissed you-dreadful and a little 
disgusting, like some large, furry beast that rubs itself against you, all too 
friendly and yet liable to turn dangerous at any moment And beyond their 
kissing and mauling there lay always the suggestion of those other, monstrous 
things (‘all that 3 was her name for them) of which she could hardly even bear to 
think 

Of course, she had had her share, and rather more than her share, of casual 
attention from men She was just pretty enough, and just plain enough, to be 
the kind of girl that men habitually pester For when a man wants a little casual 
amusement, he usually picks out a girl who is not too pretty Pretty girls (so he 
reasons) are spoilt and therefore capricious, but plain girls are easy game And 
even if you are a clergyman’s daughter, even if you live m a town like Knype 
Hill and spend almost your entire life in parish work, you don’t altogether 
escape pursuit Dorothy was all too used to it— all too used to the fattish 
middle-aged men, with their fishily hopeful eyes, who slowed down their cars 
when you passed them on the road, or who manoeuvred an introduction and 
then began pinching your elbow about ten minutes afterwards Men of all 
descriptions Even a clergyman, on one occasion-a bishop’s chaplain, he 
was 

But the trouble was that it was not better, but oh* infinitely worse when they 
were the right kind of man and the advances they made you were honourable 
Her mind slipped backwards five years, to Francis Moon, curate m those days 
at St Wedekind’s in Millborough Dear Francis 1 How gladly would she have 
married him if only it had not been for all that ' Over and over again he had 
asked her to marry him, and of course she had had to say No, and, equally of 
course, he had never known why Impossible to tell him why And then he had 
gone away, and only a year later had died so irrelevantly of pneumonia She 
whispered a prayer for his soul, momentarily forgetting that her father did not 
really approve of prayers for the dead, and then, with an effort, pushed the 
memory aside Ah, better not to think of it again' It hurt her in her breast to 
think of it. 

She could never marry, she had decided long ago upon that Even when she 
was a child she had known it Nothing would ever overcome her horror of all 
that-st the very thought of it something within her seemed to shrink and 
freeze. And of course, in a sense she did not want to overcome it For, like all 
abnormal people, she was not fully aware that she was abnormal 

And yet, though her sexual coldness seemed to her natural and inevitable, 
she knew well enough how it was that it had begun She could remember, as 
clearly as though it were yesterday, certain dreadful scenes between her father 



A Clergyman's Daughter 303 

and her mother- scenes that she had witnessed when she was no more than 
nine years old They had left a deep, secret wound m her mind And then a 
little later she had been frightened by some old steel engravings of nymphs 
pursued by satyrs To her childish mind there was something inexplicably, 
horribly sinister in those horned, semi-human creatures that lurked m thickets 
and behind large trees, ready to come bounding forth in sudden swift pursuit 
For a whole year of her childhood she had actually been afraid to walk through 
woods alone, for fear of satyrs She had grown out of the fear, of course, but not 
out of the feeling that was associated with it The satyr had remained with her 
as a symbol Perhaps she would never grow out of it, that special feeling of 
dread, of hopeless flight from something more than rationally dreadful-the 
stamp of hooves in the lonely wood, the lean, furry thighs of the satyr It was a 
thing not to be altered, not to be argued away It is, moreover, a thing too 
common nowadays, among educated women, to occasion any kind of surprise 

Most of Dorothy’s agitation had disappeared by the time she reached the 
Rectory The thoughts of satyrs and Mr Warburton, of Francis Moon and her 
foredoomed sterility, which had been going to and fro in her mind, faded out of 
it and were replaced by the accusing image of a jackboot She remembered that 
she had the best part of two hours’ work to do before going to bed tonight The 
house was m darkness She went round to the back and slipped m on tiptoe by 
the scullery door, for fear of waking her father, who was probably asleep 
already 

As she felt her way through the dark passage to the conservatory, she 
suddenly decided that she had gone wrong m going to Mr Warburton’s house 
tonight She would, she resolved, never go there again, even when she was 
certain that somebody else would be there as well Moreover, she would do 
penance tomorrow for having gone there tonight Having lighted the lamp, 
before doing anything else she found her ‘memo list’, which was already 
written out for tomorrow, and pencilled a capital P against ‘breakfast’, P stood 
for penance-no bacon again for breakfast tomorrow Then she lighted the 
oilstove under the glue-pot 

The light of the lamp fell yellow upon her sewing-machine and upon the pile 
of half-finished clothes on the table, reminding her of the yet greater pile of 
clothes that were not even begun, reminding her, also, that she was dreadfully, 
overwhelmingly tired She had forgotten her tiredness at the moment when 
Mr Warburton laid his hands on her shoulders, but now it had come back upon 
her with double force Moreover, there was a somehow exceptional quality 
about her tiredness tonight She felt, m an almost literal sense of the words, 
washed out As she stood beside the table she had a sudden, very strange 
feeling as though her mind had been entirely emptied, so that for several 
seconds she actually forgot what it was that she had come into the conservatory 
to do 

Then she remembered-the jackboots, of course 1 Some contemptible little 
demon whispered m her ear, ‘Why not go straight to bed and leave the 
jackboots till tomorrow?’ She uttered a prayer for strength, and pinched 
herself Come on, Dorothy 1 No slacking please 1 Luke ix, 62 Then, clearing 



204 A Clergyman’ s Daughter 

some of the litter off the table, she got out her scissors, a pencil, and four sheets 
of brown paper, and sat down to cut out those troublesome insteps for the 
jackboots while the glue was boiling 

When the grandfather clock in her father’s study struck midnight she was 
still at work She had shaped both jackboots by this time, and was reinforcing 
them by pasting narrow strips of paper all over them-a long, messy job Every 
bone in her body was aching, and her eyes were sticky with sleep Indeed, it 
was only rather dimly that she remembered what she was doing But she 
worked on, mechanically pasting strip after strip of paper into place, and 
pinching herself every two minutes to counteract the hypnotic sound of the 
oilstove singing beneath the glue-pot 


CHAPTER 2 

I 


Out of a black, dreamless sleep, with the sense of being drawn upwards 
through enormous and gradually lightening abysses, Dorothy awoke to a 
species of consciousness 

Her eyes were still closed By degrees, however, their lids became less 
opaque to the light, and then flickered open of their own accord She was 
looking out upon a street-a shabby, lively street of small shops and narrow- 
faced houses, with streams of men, trams, and cars passing in either direction 

But as yet it could not properly be said that she was looking For the things 
she saw were not apprehended as men, trams, and cars, nor as anything m 
particular, they were not even apprehended as things moving, not even as 
things „ She merely sazo } as an animal sees, without speculation and almost 
without consciousness. The noises of the street- the confused din of voices, the 
hooting of horns and the scream of the trams grinding on their gritty 
rails-flowed through her head provoking purely physical responses She had 
no words, nor any conception of the purpose of such things as words, nor any 
consciousness of time or place, or of her own body or even of her own 
existence 

Nevertheless, by degrees her perceptions became sharper The stream of 
moving things began to penetrate beyond her eyes and sort themselves out into 
separate images in her brain She began, still wordlessly, to observe the shapes 
of things A long-shaped thing swam past, supported on four other, narrower 
long-shaped things, and drawing after it a square-shaped thmg balanced on 
two circles, Dorothy watched it pass, and suddenly, as though spontaneously, 
a word flashed into her mind The word was ‘horse’ It faded, but returned 
presently in the more complex form ‘ That is a horse*’ Other words 
followed- ‘house’, ‘street’, ‘tram’, ‘car’, ‘bicycle’-until m a few minutes she 
had found a name for almost everything within sight She discovered the 



A Clergyman’ s Daughter 305 

words ‘man’ and ‘woman’, and, speculating upon these words, discovered that 
she knew the difference between living and inanimate things, and between 
human beings and horses, and between men and women 

It was only now, after becoming aware of most of the things about her, that 
she became aware of herself Hitherto she had been as it were a pair of eyes with 
a receptive but purely impersonal brain behind them But now, with a curious 
little shock, she discovered her separate and umque existence, she could feel 
herself existing, it was as though something within her were exclaiming ‘I am 
I 1 ’ Also, in some way she knew that this ‘I’ had existed and been the same from 
remote periods in the past, though it was a past of which she had no 
remembrance 

But it was only for a moment that this discovery occupied her From the first 
there was a sense of incompleteness m it, of something vaguely unsatisfactory 
And it was this the ‘I am I’ which had seemed an answer had itself become a 
question It was no longer ‘I am I’, but ‘who ami’ 5 

Who was she ? She turned the question over m her mmd, and found that she 
had not the dimmest notion of who she was, except that, watching the people 
and horses passing, she grasped that she was a human being and not a horse 
And that the question altered itself and took this form ‘Am I a man or a 
woman 55 ’ Again neither feeling nor memory gave any clue to the answer But at 
that moment, by accident possibly, her finger-tips brushed against her body 
She realized more clearly than before that her body existed, and that it was her 
own-that it was, m fact, herself She began to explore it with her hands, and 
her hands encountered breasts She was a woman, therefore Only women had 
breasts In some way she knew, without knowing how she knew, that all those 
women who passed had breasts beneath their clothes, though she could not see 
them 

She now grasped that in order to identify herself she must examine her own 
body, beginning with her face, and for some moments she actually attempted 
to look at her own face, before realizing that this was impossible She looked 
down, and saw a shabby black satin dress, rather long, a pair of flesh-coloured 
artificial silk stockings, laddered and dirty, and a pair of very shabby black 
satin shoes with high heels None of them was in the least familiar to her She 
examined her hands, and they were both strange and unstrange. They were 
smallish hands, with hard palms, and very dirty. After a moment she realized 
that it was their dirtiness that made them strange to her The hands themselves 
seemed natural and appropriate, though she did not recognize them 

After hesitating a few moments longer, she turned to her left and began to 
walk slowly along the pavement A fragment of knowledge had come to her, 
mysteriously, out of the blank past the existence of mirrors, their purpose, and 
the fact that there are often mirrors m shop windows After a moment she came 
to a cheap little jeweller’s shop in which a strip of mirror, set at an angle, 
reflected the faces of people passing Dorothy picked her reflection out from 
among a dozen others, immediately realizing it to be her own Yet it could not 
be said that she had recognized it, she had no memory of ever havmg seen it till 
this moment It showed her a woman’s youngish face, thin, very blonde, with 



306 A Clergyman's Daughter 

crow’s-feet round the eyes, and faintly smudged with dirt A vulgar black 
cloche hat was stuck carelessly on the head, concealing most of the hair The 
face was quite unfamiliar to her, and yet not strange She had not known till 
this moment what face to expect, but now that she had seen it she realized that 
it was the face she might have expected It was appropriate It corresponded to 
something within her 

As she turned away from the jeweller’s mirror, she caught sight of the words 
‘Fry’s Chocolate’ on a shop window opposite, and discovered that she 
understood the purpose of writing, and also, after a momentary effort, that she 
was able to read Her eyes flitted across the street, taking m and deciphering 
odd scraps of print, the names of shops, advertisements, newspaper posters 
She spelled out the letters of two red and white posters outside a tobacconist’s 
shop One of them read, ‘Fresh Rumours about Rector’s Daughter’, and the 
other, ‘Rector’s Daughter Now believed in Paris’ Then she looked upwards, 
and saw in white lettering on the corner of a house ‘New Kent Road’ The 
words arrested her She grasped that she was standing in the New Kent Road, 
and-another fragment of her mysterious knowledge-the New Kent Road was 
somewhere in London So she was m London 

As she made this discovery a peculiar tremor ran through her Her mind was 
now fully awakened, she grasped, as she had not grasped before, the 
strangeness of her situation, and it bewildered and frightened her What could 
it all mean> What was she doing here? How had she got here? What had 
happened to her? 

The answer was not long in coming She thought-and it seemed to her that 
she understood perfectly well what the words meant ‘Of course 1 I’ve lost my 
memory 1 ’ 

At this moment two youths and a girl who were trudging past, the youths 
with clumsy sacking bundles on their backs, stopped and looked curiously at 
Dorothy They hesitated for a moment, then walked on, but halted again by a 
lamp-post five yards away Dorothy saw them looking back at her and talking 
among themselves One of the youths was about twenty, narrow-chested, 
black-haired, ruddy-cheeked, good-looking m a nosy cockney way, and 
dressed in the wreck of a raffishly smart blue suit and a check cap The other 
was about twenty-six, squat, nimble, and powerful, with a snub nose, a clear 
pink skin and huge lips as coarse as sausages, exposing strong yellow teeth He 
was frankly ragged, and he had a mat of orange-coloured hair cropped short 
and growing low on his head, which gave him a startling resemblance to an 
orang-outang. The girl was a silly-looking, plump creature, dressed in clothes 
very like Dorothy’s own Dorothy could hear some of what they were saying 

‘That tart looks ill,’ said the girl 

The orange-headed one, who was singing ‘Sonny Boy’ m a good baritone 
voice, stopped singing to answer ‘She ain’t ill,’ he said ‘She’s on the beach all 
right, though Same as us ’ 

‘She’d do jest nicely for Nobby, wouldn’t she?’ said the dark-haired one 

‘Oh, you v exclaimed the girl with a shocked-amorous air, pretending to 
smack the dark one over the head 



A Clergyman’ s Daughter 307 

The youths had lowered their bundles and leaned them against the lamp- 
post All three of them now came rather hesitantly towards Dorothy, the 
orange-headed one, whose name seemed to be Nobby, leading the way as their 
ambassador He moved with a gambolling, apelike gait, and his grm was so 
frank and wide that it was impossible not to smile back at him He addressed 
Dorothy m a friendly way 
‘Hullo, kid 1 ’ 

‘Hullo 1 ’ 

‘You on the beach, kid?’ 

‘On the beach?’ 

‘Well, on the bum?’ 

‘On the bum?’ 

‘Christ! she’s batty,’ murmured the girl, twitching at the black-haired one’s 
arm as though to pull him away 

‘Well, what I mean to say, kid-have you got any money?’ 

‘I don’t know ’ 

At this all three looked at one another in stupefaction For a moment they 
probably thought that Dorothy really was batty But simultaneously Dorothy, 
who had earlier discovered a small pocket in the side of her dress, put her hand 
into it and felt the outline of a large com 
‘I believe I’ve got a penny,’ she said 

‘A penny' 5 said the dark youth disgustedly, ‘-lot of good that is to us 1 ’ 
Dorothy drew it out It was a half-crown An astonishing change came over 
the faces of the three others Nobby’s mouth split open with delight, he 
gambolled several steps to and fro like some great jubilant ape, and then, 
halting, took Dorothy confidentially by the arm 

‘That’s the mulligatawny'’ he said ‘We’ve struck it lucky-and so’ve you, 
kid, believe me You’re going to bless the day you set eyes on us lot We’re 
going to make your fortune for you, we are Now, see here, kid-are you on to 
go into cahoots with us three?’ 

‘What?’ said Dorothy 

‘What I mean to say-how about you chumming in with Flo and Charlie and 
me? Partners, see? Comrades all, shoulder to shoulder United we stand, 
divided we fall. We put up the brains, you put up the money How about it, 
kid? Are you on, or are you off?’ 

‘Shut up, Nobby 1 ’ interrupted the girl ‘She don’t understand a word of 
what you’re saying Talk to her proper, can’t you?’ 

‘That’ll do, Flo,’ said Nobby equably ‘You keep it shut and leave the 
talking to me I got a way with the tarts, I have Now, you listen to me, 
kid-what might your name happen to be, kid?’ 

Dorothy was within an ace of saying ‘I don’t know,’ but she was sufficiently 
on the alert to stop herself in time Choosing a feminine name from the half- 
dozen that sprang immediately into her mind, she answered, ‘Ellen ’ 

‘Ellen That’s the mulligatawny No surnames when you’re on the bum 
Well now, Ellen dear, you listen to me. Us three are going down hopping, 
see-* 



A Clergyman’ s Daughter 


308 

‘Hopping?’ 

‘’Oppmg’’ put m the dark youth impatiently, as though disgusted by 
Dorothy’s ignorance His voice and manner were rather sullen, and his accent 
much baser than Nobby’s ‘Pickin’ ’ops-dahn in Kent 1 C’n understand that, 
can’t yer?’ 

‘Oh, hops' For beer?’ 

‘That’s the mulligatawny’ Coming on fine, she is Well, kid, ’z I was saying, 
here’s us three going down hopping, and got a job promised us and 
all-Blessington’s farm, Lower Molesworth Only we’re just a bit m the 
mulligatawny, see? Because we ain’t got a brown between us, and we got to do 
it on the toby- thirty-five miles it is -and got to tap for our tommy and skipper 
at night as well And that’s a bit of a mulligatawny, with ladies m the party But 
now s’pose f rmstance you was to come along with us, see? We c’d take the 
twopenny tram far as Bromley, and that’s fifteen miles done, and we won’t 
need skipper more’n one night on the way And you can chum in at our 
bm-four to a bin’s the best pickmg-and if Blessington’s paying twopence a 
bushel you’ll turn your ten bob a week easy What do you say to it, kid? Your 
two and a tanner won’t do you much good here in Smoke But you go into 
partnership with us, and you’ll get your kip for a month and something 
over-and we’ll get a lift to Bromley and a bit of scran as well ’ 

About a quarter of his speech was intelligible to Dorothy She asked rather at 
random 

‘What is scran * ’ 

‘Scran? Tommy-food I can see you ain’t been long on the beach, kid ’ 

‘Oh Well, you want me to come down hop-picking with you, is that it?’ 
‘That’s it, Ellen my dear Are you on, or are you off?’ 

‘AH right,’ said Dorothy promptly ‘I’ll come ’ 

She made this decision without any misgiving whatever It is true that if she 
had had time to think over her position, she would probably have acted 
differently, in all probability she would have gone to a police station and asked 
for assistance That would have been the sensible course to take But Nobby 
and the others had appeared just at the critical moment, and, helpless as she 
was, it seemed quite natural to throw m her lot with the first human being who 
presented himself. Moreover, for some reason which she did not understand, it 
reassured her to hear that they were making for Kent Kent, it seemed to her, 
was the very place to which she wanted to go The others showed no further 
curiosity, and asked no uncomfortable questions Nobby simply said, ‘O K 
That’s the mulligatawny’’ and then gently took Dorothy’s half-crown out of 
her hand and slid it into his pocket-in case she should lose it, he explained 
The dark youth-apparently his name was Charlie- said m his surly, 
disagreeable way 

‘Come on, less get movin’’ It’s ’ar-parse two already We don’t want to miss 
that there — tram. Where d’they start from. Nobby?’ 

‘The Elephant,’ said Nobby ‘and we got to catch it before four o’clock, 
because they don’t give no free rides after four ’ 

‘Come on, then, don’t less waste no more time Nice job we’ll ’ave of it if we 



A Clergyman 's Daughter 309 

got to ’ike it down to Bromley and look for a place to skipper in the — dark 
C’m on, Flo ’ 

‘Quick march 1 ’ said Nobby, swinging his bundle on to his shoulder 
They set out, without more words said, Dorothy, still bewildered but feeling 
much better than she had felt half an hour ago, walked beside Flo and Charlie, 
who talked to one another and took no further notice of her From the very first 
they seemed to hold themselves a little aloof from Dorothy- willing enough to 
share her half-crown, but with no friendly feelings towards her Nobby 
marched m front, stepping out briskly m spite of his burden, and singing, with 
spirited imitations of military music, the well-known military song of which 
the only recorded words seem to be 

was all the band could play, 

“ — 1 — And the same to you 1 ’ 


2 


This was the twenty-ninth of August It was on the mght of the twenty-first 
that Dorothy had fallen asleep in the conservatory, so that there had been an 
interregnum in her life of not quite eight days 

The thing that had happened to her was commonplace enough-almost 
every week one reads m the newspapers of a similar case A man disappears 
from home, is lost sight of for days or weeks, and presently fetches up at a 
police station or m a hospital, with no notion of who he is or where he has come 
from As a rule it is impossible to tell how he has spent the intervening time, he 
has been wandering, presumably, m some hypnotic or somnambulistic state m 
which he has nevertheless been able to pass for normal In Dorothy’s case only 
one thing is certain, and that is that she had been robbed at some time durmg 
her travels, for the clothes she was wearing were not her own, and her gold 
cross was missing 

At the moment when Nobby accosted her, she was already on the road to 
recovery; and if she had been properly cared for, her memory might have come 
back to her within a few days or even hours, A very small thing would have 
been enough to accomplish it, a chance meeting with a friend, a photograph of 
her home, a few questions skilfully put But as it was, the slight mental 
stimulus that she needed was never given. She was left in the peculiar state m 
which she had first found herself-a state m which her mind was potentially 
normal, but not quite strung up to the effort of puzzling out her own identity. 

For of course, once she had thrown in her lot with Nobby and the others, all 
chance of reflection was gone There was no time to sit down and think the 
matter over-no time to come to grips with her difficulty and reason her way to 
its solution In the strange, dirty sub-world into which she was instantly 



gio A Clergyman’ s Daughter 

plunged, even five minutes of consecutive thought would have been 
impossible The days passed m ceaseless nightmarish activity Indeed, it was 
very like a nightmare, a nightmare not of urgent terrors, but of hunger, 
squalor, and fatigue, and of alternating heat and cold Afterwards, when she 
looked back upon that time, days and nights merged themselves together so 
that she could never remember with perfect certainty how many of them there 
had been She only knew that for some indefinite period she had been 
perpetually footsore and almost perpetually hungry Hunger and the soreness 
of her feet were her clearest memories of that time, and also the cold of the 
nights, and a peculiar, blowsy, witless feeling that came of sleeplessness and 
constant exposure to the air 

After getting to Bromley they had ‘drummed up’ on a horrible, paper- 
littered rubbish dump, reeking with the refuse of several slaughter-houses, 
and then passed a shuddering night, with only sacks for cover, in long wet 
grass on the edge of a recreation ground In the morning they had started out, 
on foot, for the hopfields Even at this early date Dorothy had discovered that 
the tale Nobby had told her, about the promise of a job, was totally untrue He 
had invented it~he confessed this quite light-heartedly-to induce her to come 
with them Their only chance of getting a job was to march down into the hop 
country and apply at every farm till they found one where pickers were still 
needed 

They had perhaps thirty-five miles to go, as the crow flies, and yet at the end 
of three days they had barely reached the fringe of the hopfields The need of 
getting food, of course, was what slowed their progress They could have 
marched the whole distance in two days or even in a day if they had not been 
obliged to feed themselves As it was, they had hardly even time to think of 
whether they were going m the direction of the hopfields or not, it was food 
that dictated all their movements Dorothy’s half-crown had melted within a 
few hours, and after that there was nothing for it except to beg But there came 
the difficulty One person can beg his food easily enough on the road, and even 
two can manage it, but it is a very different matter when there are four people 
together In such circumstances one can only keep alive if one hunts for food as 
persistently and single-mmdedly as a wild beast Food-that was their sole 
preoccupation during those three days-just food, and the endless difficulty of 
getting it 

From morning to night they were begging They wandered enormous 
distances, zigzagging right across the country, trailing from village to village 
and from house to house, ‘tapping’ at every butcher’s and every baker’s and 
every likely looking cottage, and hanging hopefully round picnic parties, and 
wavmg-always vamly-at passing cars, and accosting old gentlemen with the 
right kind of face and pitching hard-up stones Often they went five miles out 
of their way to get a crust of bread or a handful of scraps of bacon. All of them 
begged, Dorothy with the others, she had no remembered past, no standards of 
comparison to make her ashamed of it And yet with all their efforts they would 
have gone empty-bellied half the time if they had not stolen as well as begged 
At dusk and in the early mornings they pillaged the orchards and the fields. 



A Clergyman's Daughter 31 1 

stealing apples, damsons, pears, cobnuts, autumn raspberries, and, above all, 
potatoes, Nobby counted it a sm to pass a potato field without getting at least a 
pocketful It was Nobby who did most of the stealing, while the others kept 
guard He was a bold thief, it was his peculiar boast that he would steal 
anything that was not tied down, and he would have landed them all m prison 
if they had not restrained him sometimes Once he even laid hands on a goose, 
but the goose set up a fearful clamour, and Charlie and Dorothy dragged 
Nobby off just as the owner came out of doors to see what was the matter 
Each of those first days they walked between twenty and twenty-five miles 
They trailed across commons and through buried villages with incredible 
names, and lost themselves in lanes that led nowhere, and sprawled exhausted 
in dry ditches smelling of fennel and tansies, and sneaked into private woods 
and ‘drummed up’ m thickets were firewood and water were handy, and 
cooked strange, squalid meals m the two two-pound snuff-tins that were their 
only cooking pots Sometimes, when their luck was in, they had excellent stews 
of cadged bacon and stolen cauliflowers, sometimes great insipid gorges of 
potatoes roasted m the ashes, sometimes jam made of stolen autumn 
raspberries which they boiled in one of the snuff-tins and devoured while it 
was still scalding hot Tea was the one thing they never ran short of Even 
when there was no food at all there was always tea, stewed, dark brown and 
reviving It is a thing that can be begged more easily than most ‘Please, 
ma’am, could you spare me a pinch of tea^’ is a plea that seldom fails, even with 
the case-hardened Kentish housewives 

The days were burning hot, the white roads glared and the passing cars sent 
stinging dust into their faces Often families of hop-pickers drove past, 
cheering, in lorries piled sky-high with furniture, children, dogs, and 
birdcages The nights were always cold There is hardly such a thing as a night 
in England when it is really warm after midnight Two large sacks were all the 
bedding they had between them Flo and Charlie had one sack, Dorothy had 
the other, and Nobby slept on the bare ground The discomfort was almost as 
bad as the cold If you lay on your back, your head, with no pillow, lolled 
backwards so that your neck seemed to be breaking, if you lay on your side, 
your hip-bone pressing against the earth caused you torments Even when, 
towards the small hours, you managed to fall asleep by fits and starts, the cold 
penetrated into your deepest dreams Nobby was the only one who could really 
stand it He could sleep as peacefully in a nest of sodden grass as in a bed, and 
his coarse, simian face, with barely a dozen red-gold hairs glittering on the chm 
like snippmgs of copper wire, never lost its warm, pink colour He was one of 
those red-haired people who seem to glow with an inner radiance that warms 
not only themselves but the surrounding air 

All this strange, comfortless life Dorothy took utterly for granted-only 
dimly aware, if at all, that the other, unremembered life that lay behind her had 
been m some way different from this After only a couple of days she had 
ceased to wonder any longer about her queer predicament She accepted 
everythmg-accepted the dirt and hunger and fatigue, the endless trailing to 
and fro, the hot, dusty days and the sleepless, shivering nights. She was, m any 



312 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

case, far too tired to think By the afternoon of the second day they were all 
desperately, overwhelmingly tired, except Nobby, whom nothing could tire 
Even the fact that soon after they set out a nail began to work its way through 
the sole of his boot hardly seemed to trouble him There were periods of an 
hour at a time when Dorothy seemed almost to be sleeping as she walked She 
had a burden to carry now, for as the two men were already loaded and Flo 
steadfastly refused to carry anything, Dorothy had volunteered to carry the 
sack that held the stolen potatoes They generally had ten pounds or so of 
potatoes in reserve Dorothy slung the sack over her shoulder as Nobby and 
Charlie did with their bundles, but the string cut into her like a saw and the 
sack bumped against her hip and chafed it so that finally it began to bleed Her 
wretched, flimsy shoes had begun to go to pieces from the very beginning On 
the second day the heel of her right shoe came off and left her hobbling, but 
Nobby, expert m such matters, advised her to tear the heel off the other shoe 
and walk flatfooted The result was a fiery pain down her shins when she 
walked uphill, and a feeling as though the soles of her feet had been hammered 
with an iron bar 

But Flo and Charlie were in a much worse case than she They were not so 
much exhausted as amazed and scandalized by the distances they were 
expected to walk Walking twenty miles m a day was a thing they had never 
heard of till now They were cockneys born and bred, and though they had had 
several months of destitution in London, neither of them had ever been on the 
road before Charlie, till fairly recently, had been m good employment, and 
Flo, too, had had a good home until she had been seduced and turned out of 
doors to live on the streets They had fallen in with Nobby in Trafalgar Square 
and agreed to come hop-picking with him, imagining that it would be a bit of a 
lark Of course, having been ‘on the beach’ a comparatively short time, they 
looked down on Nobby and Dorothy They valued Nobby’s knowledge of the 
road and his boldness in thieving, but he was their social mferior-that was 
their attitude And as for Dorothy, they scarcely even deigned to look at her 
after her half-crown came to an end 

Even on the second day their courage was failing They lagged behind, 
grumbled incessantly, and demanded more than their fair share of food By 
the third day it was almost impossible to keep them on the road at all They 
were pining to be back in London, and had long ceased to care whether they 
ever got to the hopfields or not, all they wanted to do was to sprawl in any 
comfortable halting place they could find, and, when there was any food left, 
devour endless snacks, After every halt there was a tedious argument before 
they could be got to their feet again 

‘Come on, blokes 1 ’ Nobby would say ‘Pack your peter up, Charlie Time we 
was getting off ” 5 

‘Oh, — getting off 1 ’ Charlie would answer morosely 

‘Well, we can’t skipper here, can we^ We said we was going to hike as far as 
Sevenoaks tonight, didn’t we>’ 

‘Oh, — Sevenoaks 1 Sevenoaks or any other bleeding place-it don’t make 
any bleeding difference to me ’ 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 31 3 

‘But — it' We want to get a job tomorrow, don’t we ? And we got to get down 
among the farms ’fore we can start looking for one ’ 

‘Oh, — the farms' I wish I’d never ’eard of a — ’op' I wasn’t brought up to 
this-’ikmg and skippering like you was I’m fed up, that’s what I am — fed 
up ’ 

‘If this is bloody ’oppmg,’ Flo would chime in, ‘I’ve ’ad my bloody bellyful 
of it already ’ 

Nobby gave Dorothy his private opinion that Flo and Charlie would 
probably ‘jack ofF if they got the chance of a lift back to London But as for 
Nobby, nothing disheartened him or ruffled his good temper, not even when 
the nail in his boot was at its worst and his filthy remnant of a sock was dark 
with blood By the third day the nail had worn a permanent hole m his foot, 
and Nobby had to halt once in a mile to hammer it down 

‘’Scuse me, kid,’ he would say, ‘got to attend to my bloody hoof again This 
nail’s a mulligatawny ’ 

He would search for a round stone, squat m the ditch and carefully hammer 
the nail down 

‘There'’ he would say optimistically, feelmg the place with his thumb ‘ That 
b — ’s in his grave' 5 

The epitaph should have been Resurgam, however The nail invariably 
worked its way up again within a quarter of an hour 

Nobby had tried to make love to Dorothy, of course, and, when she repulsed 
him, bore her no grudge He had that happy temperament that is incapable of 
taking its own reverses very seriously He was always debonair, always singing 
m a lusty baritone voice-his three favourite songs were ‘Sonny Boy’, °Twas 
Christmas Day in the Workhouse’ (to the tune of ‘The Church’s One 
Foundation’), and “‘ — '” was all the band could play’, given with lively 
renderings of military music He was twenty-six years old and was a widower, 
and had been successively a seller of newspapers, a petty thief, a Borstal boy, a 
soldier, a burglar, and a tramp These facts, however, you had to piece together 
for yourself, for he was not equal to giving a consecutive account of his life His 
conversation was studded with casual picturesque memories-the six months 
he had served m a line regiment before he was invalided out with a damaged 
eye, the loathsomeness of the skilly m Holloway, his childhood in the Deptford 
gutters, the death of his wife, aged eighteen, in childbirth, when he was 
twenty, the horrible suppleness of the Borstal canes, the dull boom of the 
nitro-glycerme, blowing in the safe door at Woodward’s boot and shoe factory, 
where Nobby had cleared a hundred and twenty-five pounds and spent it m 
three weeks 

On the afternoon of the third day they reached the fringe of the hop country, 
and began to meet discouraged people, mostly tramps, trailing back to London 
with the news that there was nothing doing-hops were bad and the price 'was 
low, and the gypsies and ‘home pickers’ had collared all the jobs At this Flo 
and Charlie gave up hope altogether, but by an adroit mixture of bullying and 
persuasion Nobby managed to drive them a few miles farther. In a little village 
called Wale they fell m with an old Imhwoman-Mrs McElhgot was her 



314 A Clergyman's Daughter 

name-who had just been given a job at a neighbouring hopfield, and they 
swapped some of their stolen apples for a piece of meat she had ‘bummed’ 
earlier in the day She gave them some useful hints about hop-picking and 
about what farms to try They were all sprawling on the village green, tired 
out, opposite a little general shop with some newspaper posters outside 
‘You’d best go down’n have a try at Chalmers’s,’ Mrs McElligot advised 
them in her base Dublin accent ‘Dat’s a bit above five mile from here I’ve 
heard tell as Chalmers wants a dozen pickers still I daresay he’d give y’a job if 
you gets dere early enough ’ 

‘Five miles' Cnpes' Ain’t there none nearer’n that?’ grumbled Charlie 
‘Well, dere’s Norman’s I got a job at Norman’s meself-I’m startin’ 
tomorrow morning’ But ’twouldn’t be no use for you to try at Norman’s He 
ain’t takin’ on none but home pickers, an’ dey say as he’s goin’ to let half his 
hops blow ’ 

‘What’s home pickers?’ said Nobby 

‘Why, dem as has got homes o’ deir own Eider you got to live in de 
neighbourhood, or else de farmer’s got to give y’a hut to sleep in Dat’s de law 
nowadays In de ole days when you come down hoppm’, you kipped in a stable 
an’ dere was no questions asked But dem bloody interferin’ gets of a Labour 
Government brought in a law to say as no pickers was to be taken on widout de 
farmer had proper accommodation for ’em So Norman only takes on folks as 
has got homes o’ deir own ’ 

‘Well, you ain’t got a home of your own, have you?’ 

‘No bloody fear' But Norman t’inks I have I kidded’m I was stayin’ in a 
cottage near by Between you an’ me. I’m skipperin’ in a cow byre ’Tain’t so 
bad except for de stmk o’ de muck, but you got to be out be five m de mornm’, 
else de cowmen ’ud catch you ’ 

‘We ain’t got no experience of hopping,’ Nobby said ‘I wouldn’t know a 
bloody hop if I saw one Best to let on you’re an old hand when you go up for a 
job, eh?’ 

‘Hell 1 Hops don’t need no experience Tear ’em off an’ flmg ’em into de bin 
Dat’s all der is to it, wid hops ’ 

Dorothy was nearly asleep She heard the others talking desultorily, first 
about hop-pickmg, then about some story m the newspapers of a girl who had 
disappeared from home Flo and Charlie had been reading the posters on the 
shop-front opposite, and this had revived them somewhat, because the posters 
reminded them of London and its joys The missing girl, in whose fate they 
seemed to be rather interested, was spoken of as ‘The Rector’s Daughter’ 

‘J’a see that one, Flo?’ said Charlie, reading a poster aloud with intense 
relish ‘“Secret Love Life of Rector’s Daughter Startling Revelations ” Coo' 
Wish I ’ad a penny to ’ave a read of that!’ 

‘Oh? What’s ’t all about, then?’ 

‘What? Didn’t j’a read about it? Papers ’as bm full of it Rector’s Daughter 
this and Rector’s Daughter that- wasn’t ’alf smutty, some of it, too ’ 

‘She’s bit of hot stuff, the ole Rector’s Daughter,’ said Nobby reflec- 
tively, lying on his back ‘Wish she was here now' I’d know what to do 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 31 5 

with her, all right, I w ould ’ 

‘ ’T was a kid run away from home,’ put in Mrs McElhgot ‘She was carryin’ 
on wid a man twenty year older’n herself, an’ now she’s disappeared an’ dey’re 
searchm’ for her high an’ low * 

‘Jacked off m the middle of the night m a motor-car with no clo’es on ’cep’ 
’er nightdress,’ said Charlie appreciatively ‘The ’ole village sore ’em go ’ 
‘Dere’s some t’mk as he’s took her abroad an’ sold her to one o’ dem flash 
cat-houses in Parrus,’ added Mrs McElhgot 
‘No clo’es on ’cep’ ’er nightdress^ Dirty tart she must ’a been 1 ’ 

The conversation might have proceeded to further details, but at this 
moment Dorothy interrupted it What they were saying had roused a faint 
curiosity in her She realized that she did not know the meaning of the word 
‘Rector’ She sat up and asked Nobby 
‘What is a Rector^ 1 ’ 

‘Rector^ Why, a sky-pilot-parson bloke Bloke that preaches and gives out 
the hymns and that in church We passed one of ’em yesterday-riding a green 
bicycle and had his collar on back to front A priest-clergyman You know ’ 
‘Oh Yes, I think so ’ 

‘Priests 1 Bloody ole getsies dey are too, some o’ dem,’ said Mrs McElhgot 
reminiscently 

Dorothy was left not much the wiser What Nobby had said did enlighten 
her a little, but only a very little The whole train of thought connected with 
‘church’ and ‘clergyman’ was strangely vague and blurred in her mind It was 
one of the gaps-there was a number of such gaps-m the mysterious 
knowledge that she had brought with her out of the past 
That was their third night on the road When it was dark they slipped into a 
spinney as usual to ‘skipper’, and a little after midnight it began to pelt with 
ram They spent a miserable hour stumbling to and fro in the darkness, trying 
to find a place to shelter, and finally found a hay- stack, where they huddled 
themselves on the lee side till it was light enough to see, Flo blubbered 
throughout the night m the most intolerable manner, and by the morning she 
was in a state of semi-collapse Her silly fat face, washed clean by rain and 
tears, looked like a bladder of lard, if one can imagine a bladder of lard 
contorted with self-pity Nobby rooted about under the hedge until he had 
collected an armful of partially dry sticks, and then managed to get a fire going 
and boil some tea as usual There was no weather so bad that Nobby could not 
produce a can of tea He carried, among other things, some pieces of old 
motor tyre that would make a flare when the wood was wet, and he even 
possessed the art, known only to a few cognoscenti among tramps, of getting 
water to boil over a candle 

Everyone’s limbs had stiffened after the horrible night, and Flo declared 
herself unable to walk a step farther Charlie backed her up So, as the other 
two refused to move, Dorothy and Nobby went on to Chalmers’s farm, 
arranging a rendezvous where they should meet when they had tried their luck 
They got to Chalmers’s, five miles away, found their way through vast 
orchards to the hop-fields, and were told that the overseer ‘would be along 



316 A Clergyman's Daughter 

presently’ So they waited four hours on the edge of the plantation, with the 
sun drying their clothes on their backs, watching the hop-pickers at work It 
was a scene somehow peaceful and alluring The hop bines, tall climbing 
plants like runner beans enormously magnified, grew in green leafy lanes, with 
the hops dangling from them m pale green bunches like gigantic grapes When 
the wind stirred them they shook forth a fresh, bitter scent of sulphur and cool 
beer In each lane of bines a family of sunburnt people were shredding the 
hops into sacking bins, and singing as they worked, and presently a hooter 
sounded and they knocked off to boil cans of tea over crackling fires of hop 
bmes Dorothy envied them greatly How happy they looked, sitting round the 
fires with their cans of tea and their hunks of bread and bacon, m the smell of 
hops and wood smoke 1 She pined for such a job-however, for the present there 
was nothing doing At about one o’clock the overseer arrived and told them 
that he had no jobs for them, so they trailed back to the road, only avenging 
themselves on Chalmers’s farm by stealing a dozen apples as they went 

When they reached their rendezvous, Flo and Charlie had vanished Of 
course they searched for them, but, equally of course, they knew very well 
what had happened Indeed, it was perfectly obvious Flo had made eyes at 
some passing lorry driver, who had given the two of them a lift back to London 
for the chance of a good cuddle on the way Worse yet, they had stolen both 
bundles Dorothy and Nobby had not a scrap of food left, not a crust of bread 
nor a potato nor a pinch of tea, no bedding, and not even a snuff-tin in which to 
cook anything they could cadge or steal-nothing, m fact, except the clothes 
they stood up in 

The next thirty-six hours were a bad time-a very bad time How they pined 
for a job, in their hunger and exhaustion 1 But the chances of getting one 
seemed to grow smaller and smaller as they got farther into the hop country 
They made interminable marches from farm to farm, gettmg the same answer 
everywhere-no pickers needed-and they were so busy marching to and fro 
that they had not even time to beg, so that they had nothing to eat except stolen 
apples and damsons that tormented their stomachs with their acid juice and yet 
left them ravenously hungry It did not ram that night, but it was much colder 
than before Dorothy did not even attempt to sleep, but spent the night in 
crouching over the fire and keeping it alight They were hiding m a beech 
wood, under a squat, ancient tree that kept the wind away but also wetted them 
periodically with sprinklings of chilly dew Nobby, stretched on his back, 
mouth open, one broad cheek faintly illumined by the feeble rays of the fire, 
slept as peacefully as a child. All night long a vague wonder, born of 
sleeplessness and intolerable discomfort, kept stirring m Dorothy’s mind Was 
this the life to which she had been bred-this life of wandering empty-bellied 
all day and shivermg at night under dripping trees? Had it been like this even 
in the blank past? Where had she come from? Who was she? No answer came, 
and they were on the road at dawn By the evening they had tried at eleven 
farms m all, and Dorothy’s legs were giving out, and she was so dizzy with 
fatigue that she found difficulty in walking straight 

But late in the evening, quite unexpectedly, their luck turned They tried at 



A Clergyman’ s Daughter 317 

a farm named Cairns’s, in the village of Clintock, and were taken on 
immediately, with no questions asked The overseer merely looked them up 
and down, said briefly, ‘Right you are-you’ll do Start m the morning, bm 
number 7, set 19,’ and did not even bother to ask their names Hop-pickmg, it 
seemed, needed neither character nor experience 
They found their way to the meadow where the pickers’ camp was situated 
In a dreamlike state, between exhaustion and the joy of having got a job at last, 
Dorothy found herself walking through a maze of tin-roofed huts and gypsies’ 
caravans with many-coloured washing hanging from the windows Hordes of 
children swarmed m the narrow grass alleys between the huts, and ragged, 
agreeable-looking people were cooking meals over innumerable faggot fires At 
the bottom of the field there were some round tin huts, much inferior to the 
others, set apart for unmarried people An old man who was toasting cheese at 
a fire directed Dorothy to one of the women’s huts 
Dorothy pushed open the door of the hut It was about twelve feet across, 
with unglazed windows which had been boarded up, and it had no furniture 
whatever There seemed to be nothing in it but an enormous pile of straw 
reaching to the roof-m fact, the hut was almost entirely filled with straw To 
Dorothy’s eyes, already sticky with sleep, the straw looked paradisically 
comfortable She began to push her way into it, and was checked by a sharp 
yelp from beneath her 

‘’Ere' What yer doing’ of? Get off of it 1 ’Oo asked you to walk about on my 
belly, stoopid?’ 

Seemingly there were women down among the straw Dorothy burrowed 
foward more circumspectly, tripped over something, sank into the straw and m 
the same instant began to fall asleep A rough-looking woman, partially 
undressed, popped up like a mermaid from the strawy sea 
°Ullo, mate'’ she said ‘Jest about all m, ain’t you, mate?’ 

‘Yes, I’m tired- very tired ’ 

‘Well, you’ll bloody freeze m this straw with no bed-clo’es on you Ain’t you 
got a blanket?’ 

‘No,’ 

°Alf a mo, then I got a poke ’ere ’ 

She dived down into the straw and re-emerged with a hop-poke seven feet 
long Dorothy was asleep already She allowed herself to be woken up, and 
inserted herself somehow into the sack, which was so long that she could get 
into it head and all, and then she was half wriggling, half sinking down, deep 
down, into a nest of straw warmer and drier than she had conceived possible. 
The straw tickled her nostrils and got into her hair and pricked her even 
through the sack, but at that moment no imaginable sleeping place-not 
Cleopatra’s couch of swan’s-down nor the floating bed of Haroun al 
Raschid-could have caressed her more voluptuously 



3 


It was remarkable how easily, once you had got a job, you settled down to the 
routine of hop-picking After only a week of it you ranked as an expert picker, 
and felt as though you had been picking hops all your life 

It was exceedingly easy work Physically, no doubt, it was exhaustmg-it 
kept you on your feet ten or twelve hours a day, and you were dropping with 
sleep by six in the evening-but it needed no kind of skill Quite a third of the 
pickers in the camp were as new to the job as Dorothy herself Some of them 
had come down from London with not the dimmest idea of what hops were 
like, or how you picked them, or why One man, it was said, on his first 
morning on the way to the fields, had asked, ‘Where are the spades^’ He 
imagined that hops were dug up out of the ground 
Except for Sundays, one day at the hop camp was very like another At half 
past five, at a tap on the wall of your hut, you crawled out of your sleeping nest 
and began searching for your shoes, amid sleepy curses from the women (there 
were six or seven or possibly even eight of them) who were buried here and 
there m the straw In that vast pile of straw any clothes that you were so unwise 
as to take off always lost themselves immediately You grabbed an armful of 
straw and another of dried hop bmes, and a faggot from the pile outside, and 
got the fire going for breakfast Dorothy always cooked Nobby’s breakfast as 
well as her own, and tapped on the wall of his hut when it was ready, she being 
better at waking up m the mormng than he It was very cold on those 
September mornings, the eastern sky was fading slowly from black to cobalt, 
and the grass was silvery white with dew Your breakfast was always the 
same-bacon, tea, and bread fried in the grease of the bacon While you ate it 
you cooked another exactly similar meal, to serve for dinner, and then, 
carrying your dinner-pail, you set out for the fields, a mile-and-a-half walk 
through the blue, windy dawn, with your nose running so m the cold that you 
had to stop occasionally and wipe it on your sacking apron 

The hops were divided up into plantations of about an acre, and each 
set-forty pickers or thereabouts, under a foreman who was often a 
gypsy-picked one plantation at a time The bines grew twelve feet high or 
more, and they were trained up strings, and slung over horizontal wires, m 
rows a yard or two apart, m each row there was a sacking bin like a very deep 
hammock slung on a heavy wooden frame As soon as you arrived you swung 
your bin into position, slit the strings from the next two bines, and tore them 
down-huge, tapering strands of foliage, like the plaits of Rapunzel’s hair, that 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 319 

came tumbling down on top of you, showering you with dew You dragged 
them into place over the bin, and then, starting at the thick end of the bine, 
began tearing off the heavy bunches of hops At that hour of the morning you 
could only pick slowly and awkwardly Your hands were still stiff and the 
coldness of the dew numbed them, and the hops were wet and slippery The 
great difficulty was to pick the hops without picking the leaves and stalks as 
well, for the measurer was liable to refuse your hops if they had too many 
leaves among them 

The stems of the bines were covered with minute thorns which within two 
or three days had torn the skm of your hands to pieces In the morning it was a 
torment to begin picking when your fingers were almost too stiff to bend and 
bleeding in a dozen places, but the pain wore off when the cuts had reopened 
and the blood was flowing freely If the hops were good and you picked well, 
you could strip a bine m ten minutes, and the best bines yielded half a bushel of 
hops But the hops varied greatly from one plantation to another In some they 
were as large as walnuts, and hung m great leafless bunches which you could 
rip off with a single twist, in others they were miserable things no bigger than 
peas, and grew so thmly that you had to pick them one at a time Some hops 
were so bad that you could not pick a bushel of them in an hour 

It was slow work m the early morning, before the hops were dry enough to 
handle But presently the sun came out, and the lovely, bitter odour began to 
stream from the warming hops, and people’s early-morning surliness wore off, 
and the work got into its stride From eight till midday you were picking, 
picking, picking, in a sort of passion of work-a passionate eagerness, which 
grew stronger and stronger as the morning advanced, to get each bine done and 
shift your bin a little farther along the row At the beginning of each plantation 
all the bins started abreast, but by degrees the better pickers forged ahead, and 
some of them had finished their lane of hops when the others were barely half- 
way along, whereupon, if you were far behind, they were allowed to turn back 
and finish your row for you* which was called ‘stealing your hops’ Dorothy 
and Nobby were always among the last, there being only two of them-there 
were four people at most of the bins And Nobby was a clumsy picker, with his 
great coarse hands, on the whole, the women picked better than the men 

It Was always a neck and neck race between the two bins on either side of 
Dorothy and Nobby, bin number 6 and bin number 8 Bin number 6 was a 
family of gypsies-a curly-headed, ear-ringed father, an old dried-up leather- 
coloured mother, and two strapping sons- and bin number 8 was an old East 
End costerwoman who wore a broad hat and long black cloak and took snuff 
out of a papierm&chC box with a steamer painted on the lid She was always 
helped by relays of daughters and granddaughters who came down from 
London for two days at a time There was quite a troop of children working 
with the set, following the bins with baskets and gathering up the fallen hops 
while the adults picked And the old costerwoman’s tiny, pale granddaughter 
Rose, and a little gypsy girl, dark as an Indian, were perpetually slipping off to 
steal autumn raspberries and make swings out of hop bines; and the constant 
singing round the bins was pierced by shrill cries from the costerwoman of. 



220 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

‘Go on, Rose, you lazy little cat’ Pick them ’ops up’ I’ll warm your a — for you 1 ’ 
etc , etc 

Quite half the pickers m the set were gypsies-there were not less than two 
hundred of them m the camp Diddykies, the other pickers called them They 
were not a bad sort of people, friendly enough, and they flattered you grossly 
when they wanted to get anything out of you, yet they were sly, with the 
impenetrable slyness of savages In their oafish, Oriental faces there was a look 
as of some wild but sluggish animal-a look of dense stupidity existing side by 
side with untameable cunning Their talk consisted of about half a dozen 
remarks which they repeated over and over again without ever growing tired of 
them The two young gypsies at bm number 6 would ask Nobby and Dorothy 
as many as a dozen times a day the same conundrum 
‘What is it the cleverest man m England couldn’t do ? ’ 

‘I don’t know What>’ 

‘Tickle a gnat’s a — with a telegraph pole ’ 

At this, never-failing bellows of laughter They were all abysmally ignorant, 
they informed you with pride that not one of them could read a single word 
The old curly-headed father, who had conceived some dim notion that 
Dorothy was a ‘scholard’, once seriously asked her whether he could drive his 
caravan to New York 

At twelve o’clock a hooter down at the farm signalled to the pickers to knock 
off work for an hour, and it was generally a little before this that the measurer 
came round to collect the hops At a warning shout from the foreman of ‘ ’Ops 
ready, number nineteen 1 ’ everyone would hasten to pick up the fallen hops, 
finish off the tendrils that had been left unpicked here and there, and clear the 
leaves out of the bm There was an art in that It did not pay to pick too ‘clean’, 
for leaves and hops alike all went to swell the tally The old hands, such as the 
gypsies, were adepts at knowing just how ‘dirty’ it was safe to pick 
The measurer would come round, carrying a wicker basket which held a 
bushel, and accompanied by the ‘bookie,’ who entered the pickings of each bm 
in a ledger The ‘bookies’ were young men, clerks and chartered accountants 
and the like, who took this job as a paying holiday The measurer would scoop 
the hops out of the bm a bushel at a time, intoning as he did so, ‘One 1 Two 1 
Three’ Four!’ and the pickers would enter the number in their tally books 
Each bushel they picked earned them twopence, and naturally there were 
endless quarrels and accusations of unfairness over the measuring. Hops are 
spongy thmgs-you can crush a bushel of them into a quart pot if you choose, 
so after each scoop one of the pickers would lean over into the bm and stir the 
hops up to make them he looser, and then the measurer would hoist the end of 
the bm and shake the hops together again Some mornings he had orders to 
‘take them heavy’, and would shovel them in so that he got a couple of bushels 
at each scoop, whereat there were angry yells of, ‘Look how the b— ’s ramming 
them down’ Why don’t you bloody well stamp on thenP’ etc.; and the old 
hands would say darkly that they had known measurers to be ducked in 
qowponds on the last day of picking From the bins the hops were put into 
pokes which theoretically held a hundredweight; but it took two men to hoist a 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 321 

full poke when the measurer had been ‘taking them heavy’ You had an hour 
for dinner, and you made a fire of hop bmes-this was forbidden, but everyone 
did lt-and heated up your tea and ate your bacon sandwiches After dinner you 
were picking again till five or six m the evening, when the measurer came* once 
more to take your hops, after which you were free to go back to the camp 
Looking back, afterwards, upon her interlude of hop-picking, it was always 
the afternoons that Dorothy remembered Those long, laborious hours in the 
strong sunlight, m the sound of forty voices singing, m the smell of hops and 
wood smoke, had a quality peculiar and unforgettable As the afternoon wore 
on you grew almost too tired to stand, and the small green hop lice got into 
your hair and into your ears and worried you, and your hands, from the 
sulphurous juice, were as black as a Negro’s except where they were bleeding 
Yet you were happy, with an unreasonable happiness The work took hold of 
you and absorbed you It was stupid work, mechanical, exhausting, and every 
day more painful to the hands, and yet you never wearied of it, when the 
weather was fine and the hops were good you had the feeling that you could go 
on picking for ever and for ever It gave you a physical joy, a warm satisfied 
feeling inside you, to stand there hour after hour, tearing off the heavy clusters 
and watching the pale green pile grow higher and higher in your bin, every 
bushel another twopence in your pocket The sun burned down upon you, 
baking you brown, and the bitter, never-pallmg scent, like a wind from oceans 
of cool beer, flowed into your nostrils and refreshed you When the sun was 
shining everybody sang as they worked, the plantations rang with singing For 
some reason all the songs were sad that autumn- songs about rejected love and 
fidelity unrewarded, like gutter versions of Carmen and Manon Lescaut There 
was 


There they go~in their joy- 
’Appy gul-lucky boy- 
But ’ere am /-/-/- 
Broken- Va-arted 1 


And there was 


But I’m dan-cmg with tears-in my eyes- 
’Cos the girl-in my arms-isn’t you-o-ou 1 


And 


The bells-are nnging-for Sally- 
But no-o-ot-for Sally-and me' 

The little gypsy girl used to sing over and over again 

We’re so misable, all so misable, 

Down on Misable Farm' 


And though everyone told her that the name of it was Misery Farm, she 



322 A Clergyman's Daughter 

persisted in calling it Misable Farm The old costerwoman and her 
granddaughter Rose had a hop-pickmg song which went 

‘Our lousy ’ops' 

Our lousy ’ops 1 

When the measurer ’e comes round. 

Pick ’em up, pick ’em up off the ground 1 
When ’e comes to measure, 

’E never knows where to stop, 

Ay, ay, get in the bin 
And take the bloody lot 1 ’ 

‘There they go m their joy’, and ‘The bells are ringing for Sally’, were the 
especial favourites The pickers never grew tired of singing them, they must 
have sung both of them several hundred times over before the season came to 
an end As much a part of the atmosphere of the hopfields as the bitter scent 
and the blowsy sunlight were the tunes of those two songs, ringing through the 
leafy lanes of the bines 

When you got back to the camp, at half past six or thereabouts, you squatted 
down by the stream that ran past the huts, and washed your face, probably for 
the first time that day It took you twenty minutes or so to get the coal-black 
filth off your hands Water and even soap made no impression on it, only two 
things would remove lt-one of them was mud, and the other, curiously 
enough, was hop juice Then you cooked your supper, which was usually 
bread and tea and bacon again, unless Nobby had been along to the village and 
bought two pennyworth of pieces from the butcher It was always Nobby who 
did the shopping He was the sort of man who knows how to get four 
pennyworth of meat from the butcher for twopence, and, besides, he was 
expert in tiny economies For instance, he always bought a cottage loaf in 
preference to any of the other shapes, because, as he used to point out, a cottage 
loaf seems like two loaves when you tear it m half 

Even before you had eaten your supper you were droppmg with sleep, but 
the huge fires that people used to build between the huts were too agreeable to 
leave The farm allowed two faggots a day for each hut, but the pickers 
plundered as many more as they wanted, and also great lumps of elm root 
which kept smouldering till morning On some nights the fires were so 
enormous that twenty people could sit round them in comfort, and there was 
singing far mto the night, and telling of stories and roasting of stolen apples 
Youths and girls slipped off to the dark lanes together, and a few bold spirits 
like Nobby set out with sacks and robbed the neighbouring orchards, and the 
children played hide-and-seek in the dusk and harried the nightjars which 
haunted the camp and which, m their cockney ignorance, they imagined to be 
pheasants On Saturday nights fifty or sixty of the pickers used to get drunk m 
the pub and then march down the village street roaring bawdy songs, to the 
scandal of the inhabitants, who looked on the hopping season as decent 
provincials in Roman Gaul might have looked on the yearly incursion of the 
Goths, 

When finally you managed to drag yourself away to your nest in the straw, it 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 32 3 

was none too warm or comfortable After that first blissful night, Dorothy 
discovered that straw is wretched stuff to sleep m It is not only prickly, but, 
unlike hay, it lets m the draught from every possible direction However, you 
had the chance to steal an almost unlimited number of hop-pokes from the 
fields, and by making herself a sort of cocoon of four hop-pokes, one on top of 
the other, she managed to keep warm enough to sleep at any rate five hours a 
night 


4 


As to what you earned by hop-picking, it was just enough to keep body and 
soul together, and no more 

The rate of pay at Cairns’s was twopence a bushel, and given good hops a 
practised picker can average three bushels an hour In theory, therefore, it 
would have been possible to earn thirty shillings by a sixty-hour week 
Actually, no one in the camp came anywhere near this figure The best pickers 
of all earned thirteen or fourteen shillings a week, and the worst hardly as 
much as six shillings Nobby and Dorothy, pooling their hops and dividing the 
proceeds, made round about ten shillings a week each 

There were various reasons for this To begin with, there was the badness of 
the hops in some of the fields Again, there were the delays which wasted an 
hour or two of every day When one plantation was finished you had to carry 
your bin to the next, which might be a mile distant, and then perhaps it would 
turn out that there was some mistake, and the set, struggling under their bins 
(they weighed a hundredweight), would have to waste another half-hour in 
traipsing elsewhere Worst of all, there was the ram It was a bad September 
that year, raining one day m three. Sometimes for a whole morning or 
afternoon you shivered miserably m the shelter of the unstripped bmes, with a 
dripping hop-poke round your shoulders, waiting for the ram to stop It was 
impossible to pick when it was raining The hops were too slippery to handle, 
and if you did pick them it was worse than useless, for when sodden with water 
they shrank all to nothing in the bin Sometimes you were m the fields all day 
to earn a shilling or less 

This did not matter to the majority of the pickers, for quite half of them were 
gypsies and accustomed to starvation wages, and most of the others were 
respectable East Enders, costermongers and small shopkeepers and the like, 
who came hop-pickmg for a holiday and were satisfied if they earned enough 
for their fare both ways and a bit of fun on Saturday mghts The fanners knew 
this and traded on it Indeed, were it not that hop-picking is regarded as a 
holiday, the industry would collapse forthwith, for the price of hops is now so 
low that no farmer could afford to pay his pickers a living wage. 



324 A Clergyman’ s Daughter 

Twice a week you could ‘sub’ up to the amount of half your earnings If you 
left before the picking was finished (an inconvenient thing for the farmers) 
they had the right to pay you off at the rate of a penny a bushel instead of 
twopence-that is, to pocket half of what they owed you It was also common 
knowledge that towards the end of the season, when all the pickers had a fair 
sum owing to them and would not want to sacrifice it by throwing up their 
jobs, the farmer would reduce the rate of payment from twopence a bushel to a 
penny halfpenny Strikes were practically impossible The pickers had no 
union, and the foremen of the sets, instead of being paid twopence a bushel like 
the others, were paid a weekly wage which stopped automatically if there was a 
strike, so naturally they would raise Heaven and earth to prevent one 
Altogether, the farmers had the pickers in a cleft stick, but it was not the 
farmers who were to blame-the low price of hops was the root of the trouble 
Also as Dorothy observed later, very few of the pickers had more than a dim 
idea of the amount they earned The system of piecework disguised the low 
rate of payment 

For the first few days, before they could ‘sub’, Dorothy and Nobby very 
nearly starved, and would have starved altogether if the other pickers had not 
fed them But everyone was extraordinarily kind There was a party of people 
who shared one of the larger huts a little farther up the row, a flower-seller 
named Jim Burrows and a man named Jim Turle who was vermin man at a 
large London restaurant, who had married sisters and were close friends, and 
these people had taken a liking to Dorothy They saw to it that she and Nobby 
should not starve Every evening during the first few days May Turle, aged 
fifteen, would arrive with a saucepan full of stew, which was presented with 
studied casualness, lest there should be any hint of charity about it The 
formula was always the same 

‘Please, Ellen, mother says as she was just gomg to throw this stew away, and 
then she thought as p’raps you might like it She ain’t got no use for it, she says, 
and so you’d be doing her a kindness if you was to take it ’ 

It was extraordinary what a lot of things the Turles and the Burrowses were 
‘just gomg to throw away’ during those first few days On one occasion they 
even gave Nobby and Dorothy half a pig’s head ready stewed, and besides food 
they gave them several cooking pots and a tin plate which could be used as a 
frying-pan. Best of all, they asked no uncomfortable questions They knew 
well enough that there was some mystery in Dorothy’s life-‘You could see,’ 
they said, ‘as Ellen had come down in the world ’- but they made it a point of 
honour not to embarrass her by asking questions about it It was not until she 
had been more than a fortnight at the camp that Dorothy was even obliged to 
put herself to the trouble of inventing a surname 

As soon as Dorothy and Nobby could ‘sub’, their money troubles were at an 
end They lived with surprising ease at the rate of one and sixpence a day for 
the two of them. Fourpence of this went on tobacco for Nobby, and fourpence- 
halfpenny on a loaf of bread, and they spent about sevenpence a day on tea, 
sugar, milk (you could get milk at the farm at a halfpenny a half-pmt), and 
margarine and ‘pieces’ of bacon But, of course, you never got through the day 



A Clergyman 3 s Daughter 323 

without squandering another penny or two You were everlastingly hungry, 
everlastingly doing sums in farthings to see whether you could afford a kipper 
or a doughnut or a pennyworth of potato chips, and, wretched as the pickers’ 
earnings were, half the population of Kent seemed to be m conspiracy to tickle 
their money out of their pockets The local shopkeepers, with four hundred 
hop-pickers quartered upon them, made more during the hop season than all 
the rest of the year put together, which did not prevent them from looking 
down on the pickers as cockney dirt In the afternoon the farm hands would 
come round the bins selling apples and pears at seven a penny, and London 
hawkers would come with baskets of doughnuts or water ices or ‘halfpenny 
lollies’ At night the camp was thronged by hawkers who drove down from 
London with vans of horrifyingly cheap groceries, fish and chips, jellied eels, 
shrimps, shop-soiled cakes, and gaunt, glassy-eyed rabbits which had lam two 
years on the ice and were being sold off at mnepence a time 

For the most part it was a filthy diet upon which the hop-pickers 
lived-mevitably so, for even if you had the money to buy proper food, there 
was no time to cook it except on Sundays Probably it was only the abundance 
of stolen apples that prevented the camp from being ravaged by scurvy There 
was constant, systematic thieving of apples, practically everyone in the camp 
either stole them or shared them There were even parties of young men 
(employed, so it was said, by London fruit-costers) who bicycled down from 
London every week-end for the purpose of raiding the orchards As for 
Nobby, he had reduced fruit-stealing to a science Within a week he had 
collected a gang of youths who looked up to him as a hero because he was a real 
burglar and had been m jail four times, and every night they would set out at 
dusk with sacks and come back with as much as two hundredweight of fruit 
There were vast orchards near the hopfields, and the apples, especially the 
beautiful little Golden Russets, were lying m piles under the trees, rotting, 
because the farmers could not sell them It was a sm not to take them. Nobby 
said On two occasions he and his gang even stole a chicken How they 
managed to do it without waking the neighbourhood was a mystery, but it 
appeared that Nobby knew some dodge of slipping a sack over a chicken’s 
head, so that it ‘ceas’d upon the midnight with no pam’-or at any rate, with no 
noise 

In this manner a week and then a fortnight went by, and Dorothy was no 
nearer to solving the problem of her own identity Indeed, she was further 
from it than ever, for except at odd moments the subject had almost vamshed 
from her mind More and more she had come to take her curious situation for 
granted, to abandon all thoughts of either yesterday or tomorrow. That was 
the natural effect of life in the hopfields, it narrowed the range of your 
consciousness to the passing minute You could not struggle with nebulous 
mental problems when you were everlastingly sleepy and everlastingly 
occupied- for when you were not at work m the fields you were either cooking, 
or fetching things from the village, or coaxing a fire out of wet sticks, or 
trudging to and fro with cans of water, (There was only one water tap m the 
camp, and that was two hundred yards from Dorothy’s hut, and the 



226 A Clergyman's Daughter 

unspeakable earth latrine was at the same distance ) It was a life that wore you 
out, used up every ounce of your energy, and kept you profoundly, 
unquestionably happy In the literal sense of the word, it stupefied you The 
long days m the fields, the coarse food and insufficient sleep, the smell of hops 
and wood smoke, lulled you into an almost beastlike heaviness Your wits 
seemed to thicken, just as your skin did, in the ram and sunshine and perpetual 
fresh air 

On Sundays, of course, there was no work in the fields, but Sunday morning 
was a busy time, for it was then that people cooked their principal meal of the 
week, and did their laundering and mending All over the camp, while the 
jangle of bells from the village church came down the wind, mingling with the 
thin strains of ‘O God our Help’ from the ill-attended open-air service held by 
St Somebody’s Mission to Hop-pickers, huge faggot fires were blazing, and 
water boiling in buckets and tin cans and saucepans and anything else that 
people could lay their hands on, and ragged washing fluttering from the roofs 
of all the huts On the first Sunday Dorothy borrowed a basin from the Turles 
and washed first her hair, then her underclothes and Nobby’s shirt Her 
underclothes were in a shocking state How long she had worn them she did 
not know, but certainly not less than ten days, and they had been slept in all 
that while Her stockings had hardly any feet left to them, and as for her shoes, 
they only held together because of the mud that caked them 

After she had set the washing to dry she cooked the dinner, and they dined 
opulently off half a stewed chicken (stolen), boiled potatoes (stolen), stewed 
apples (stolen), and tea out of real tea-cups with handles on them, borrowed 
from Mrs Burrows And after dinner, the whole afternoon, Dorothy sat 
against the sunny side of the hut, with a dry hop-poke across her knees to hold 
her dress down, alternately dozing and reawakening Two-thirds of the people 
in the camp were doing exactly the same thing, just dozing m the sun, and 
waking to gaze at nothing, like cows It was all you felt equal to, after a week of 
heavy work 

About three o’clock, as she sat there on the verge of sleep. Nobby sauntered 
by, bare to the waist-his shirt was drying- with a copy of a Sunday newspaper 
that he had succeeded in borrowing It was Pippin's Weekly , the dirtiest of the 
five dirty Sunday newspapers He dropped it m Dorothy’s lap as he passed 

‘Have a read of that, kid,’ he said generously 

Dorothy took Pippin's Weekly and laid it across her knees, feeling herself far 
too sleepy to read A huge headline stared her in the face* ‘passion drama in 
country rectory’ And then there were some more headlines, and something 
m leaded type, and an mset photograph of a girl’s face For the space of five 
seconds or thereabouts Dorothy was actually gazing at a blackish, smudgy, but 
quite recognizable portrait of herself. 

There was a column or so of print beneath the photograph As a matter of 
fact, most of the newspapers had dropped the ‘Rector’s Daughter’ mystery by 
this time, for it was more than a fortnight old and stale news But Pippin's 
Weekly cared little whether its news was new so long as it was spicy, and that 
week’s crop of rapes and murders had been a poor one. They were giving the 



A Clergyman 3 s Daughter 327 

‘Rector’s Daughter’ one final boost-giving her, m fact, the place of honour at 
the top left-hand corner of the front page 

Dorothy gazed inertly at the photograph A girl’s face, looking out at her 
from beds of black unappetizing prmt-it conveyed absolutely nothing to her 
mind She re-read mechanically the words, ‘passion drama in country 
rectory’, without either understanding them or feeling the slightest interest 
in them She was, she discovered, totally unequal to the effort of reading, even 
the effort of looking at the photographs was too much for her Heavy sleep was 
weighing down her head Her eyes, in the act of closing, flitted across the page 
to a photograph that was either of Lord Snowden or of the man who wouldn’t 
wear a truss, and then, in the same instant, she fell asleep, with Pippin's Weekly 
across her knees 

It was not uncomfortable against the corrugated iron wall of the hut, and she 
hardly stirred till six o’clock, when Nobby woke her up to tell her that he had 
got tea ready, whereat Dorothy put Pippin's Weekly thriftily away (it would 
come in for lighting the fire), without looking at it again So for the moment the 
chance of solving her problem passed by And the problem might have 
remained unsolved even for months longer, had not a disagreeable accident, a 
week later, frightened her out of the contented and unreflecting state m which 
she was living 


5 


The following Sunday night two policemen suddenly descended upon the 
camp and arrested Nobby and two others for theft 
It happened all in a moment, and Nobby could not have escaped even if he 
had been warned beforehand, for the countryside was pullulating with special 
constables There are vast numbers of special constables m Kent They are 
sworn m every autumn-a sort of militia to deal with the marauding tribes of 
hop-pickers The farmers had been growing tired of the orchard-robbmg, and 
had decided to make an examples in terrorem 
Of course there was a tremendous uproar in the camp Dorothy came out of 
her hut to discover what was the matter, and saw a firelit ring of people towards 
which everyone was running She ran after them, and a horrid chill went 
through her, because it seemed to her that she knew already what it was that 
had happened She managed to wriggle her way to the front of the crowd, and 
saw the very thing that she had been fearing 
There stood Nobby, in the grip of an enormous policeman, and another 
policeman was holding two frightened youths by the arms One of them, a 
wretched child hardly sixteen years old, was crying bitterly Mr Cairns, a stiff- 
built man with grey whiskers, and two farm hands, were keeping guard over 



228 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

the stolen property that had been dug out of the straw of Nobby’s hut Exhibit 
A, a pile of apples, Exhibit B, some blood-stained chicken feathers Nobby 
caught sight of Dorothy among the crowd, grinned at her with a flash of large 
teeth, and winked There was a confused din of shouting 

‘Look at the pore little b — crying' Let ’im go' Bloody shame, pore little kid 
like that' Serve the young bastard right, getting us all into trouble' Let ’im go' 
Always got to put the blame on us bloody hop-pickers' Can’t lose a bloody 
apple without it’s us that’s took it Let ’im go' Shut up, can’t you 5 S’pose they 
was your bloody apples 5 Wouldn’t you bloodiwell-’ etc , etc , etc And then 
‘Stand back mate' ’Ere comes the kid’s mother ’ 

A huge Toby jug of a woman, with monstrous breasts and her hair coming 
down her back, forced her way through the ring of people and began roaring 
first at the policeman and Mr Cairns, then at Nobby, who had led her son 
astray. Finally the farm hands managed to drag her away Through the 
woman’s yells Dorothy could hear Mr Cairns gruffly interrogating Nobby 
‘Now then, young man, just you own up and tell us who you shared them 
apples with' We’re going to put a stop to this thieving game, once and for all 
You own up, and I dessay we’ll take it into consideration ’ 

Nobby answered, as blithely as ever, ‘Consideration, your a — '* 

‘Don’t you get giving me any of your lip, young man' Or else you’ll catch it 
all the hotter when you go up before the magistrate ’ 

‘Catch it hotter, your a — '’ 

Nobby grinned His own wit filled him with delight He caught Dorothy’s 
eye and winked at her once again before being led away And that was the last 
she ever saw of him 

There was further shouting, and when the prisoners were removed a few 
dozen men followed them, booing at the policemen and Mr Cairns, but 
nobody dared to interfere Dorothy meanwhile had crept away, she did not 
even stop to find out whether there would be an opportunity of saying good- 
bye to Nobby-she was too frightened, too anxious to escape Her knees were 
trembling uncontrollably When she got back to the hut, the other women 
were sitting up, talking excitedly about Nobby’s arrest She burrowed deep 
into the straw and hid herself, to be out of the sound of their voices They 
continued talking half the night, and of course, because Dorothy had 
supposedly been Nobby’s ‘tart’, they kept condoling with her and plying her 
with questions She did not answer them-pretended to be asleep. But there 
would be, she knew well enough, no sleep for her that night 
The whole thing had frightened and upset her-but it had frightened her 
more than was reasonable or understandable For she was m no kind of danger 
The farm hands did not know that she had shared the stolen apples-for that 
matter, nearly everyone m the camp had shared them-and Nobby would never 
betray her It was not even that she was greatly concerned for Nobby, who was 
frankly not troubled by the prospect of a month in jail It was something that 
was happening inside her-some change that was taking place in the 
atmosphere of her mind 

It seemed to her that she was no longer the same person that she had been an 



A Clergyman 3 s Daughter 329 

hour ago Within her and without, everything was changed It was as though a 
bubble m her brain had burst, setting free thoughts, feelings, fears of which 
she had forgotten the existence All the dreamlike apathy of the past three 
weeks was shattered For it was precisely as in a dream that she had been 
livmg-it is the especial condition of a dream that one accepts everything, 
questions nothing Dirt, rags, vagabondage, begging, stealing-all had seemed 
natural to her Even the loss of her memory had seemed natural, at least, she 
had hardly given it a thought till this moment The question ‘Who am P' had 
faded out of her mmd till sometimes she had forgotten it for hours together It 
was only now that it returned with any real urgency 

For nearly the whole of a miserable night that question went to and fro m her 
brain But it was not so much the question itself that troubled her as the 
knowledge that it was about to be answered Her memory was coming back to 
her, that was certain, and some ugly shock was coming with it She actually 
feared the moment when she should discover her own identity Something that 
she did not want to face was waiting just below the surface of her 
consciousness 

At half past five she got up and groped for her shoes as usual She went 
outside, got the fire going, and stuck the can of water among the hot embers to 
boil Just as she did so a memory, seeming irrelevant, flashed across her mmd 
It was of that halt on the village green at Wale, a fortnight ago-the time when 
they had met the old Irishwoman, Mrs McElligot Very vividly she 
remembered the scene. Herself lying exhausted on the grass, with her arm over 
her face, and Nobby and Mrs McElligot talking across her supine body; and 
Charlie, with succulent relish, reading out the poster, ‘Secret Love Life of 
Rector’s Daughter’, and herself, mystified but not deeply interested, sitting up 
and asking, ‘What is a Rector?’ 

At that a deadly chill, like a hand of ice, fastened about her heart She got up 
and hurried, almost ran back to the hut, then burrowed down to the place 
where her sacks lay and felt in the straw beneath them In that vast mound of 
straw all your loose possessions got lost and gradually worked their way to the 
bottom But after searching for some minutes, and getting herself well cursed 
by several women who were still half asleep, Dorothy found what she was 
looking for It was the copy of Pippin x s Weekly which Nobby had given her a 
week ago. She took it outside, knelt down, and spread it out m the light of the 
fire 

It was on the front page-a photograph, and three big headlines Yesl There 
it was! 

PASSION DRAMA IN COUNTRY RECTORY 
PARSON S DAUGHTER AND ELDERLY SEDUCER 

WHITE-HAIRED FATHER PROSTRATE WITH GRIEF 
(Pippin's Weekly Special) 

‘I would sooner have seen tier in her grave!’ was the Jieartbroken cry of the Rev Charles Hare, 
Rector qf Knype Hill, Suffolk, on learning of his twenty-eight-year-old daughter’s elopement 
with an elderly bachelor reamed Warbntton, describedas an artist 



5^0 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

Miss Hare, who left the town on the night of the twenty-first of August, is still missing, and all 
attempts to trace her have failed [In leaded type] Rumour, as yet unconfirmed, states that she was 
recently seen with a male companion m a hotel of evil repute in Vienna 


Readers of Pippin’s Weekly will recall that the elopement took place in dramatic circumstances 
A little before midnight on the twenty-first of August, Mrs Evelina Sempnll, a widowed lady who 
inhabits the house next door to Mr Warburton’s, happened by chance to look out of her bedroom 
window and saw Mr Warburton standing at his front gate in conversation with a young woman As 
it was a clear moonlight night, Mrs Semprill was able to distinguish this young woman as Miss 
Hare, the Rector’s daughter The pair remained at the gate for several minutes, and before going 
indoors they exchanged embraces which Mrs Semprill describes as being of a passionate nature 
About half an hour later they reappeared in Mr Warburton’s car, which was backed out of the 
front gate, and drove off m the direction of the Ipswich road Miss Hare was dressed m scanty 
attire, and appeared to be under the influence of alcohol 
It is now learned that for some time past Miss Hare had been in the habit of making clandestine 
visits to Mr Warburton’s house Mrs Semprill, who could only with great difficulty be persuaded 
to speak upon so painful a subject, has further revealed- 


Dorothy crumpled Pippin’s Weekly violently between her hands and thrust 
it into the fire, upsetting the can of water There was a cloud of ashes and 
sulphurous smoke, and almost in the same instant Dorothy pulled the paper 
out of the fire unburnt No use funking lt-better to learn the worst She read 
on, with a horrible fascination It was not a nice kind of story to read about 
yourself For it was strange, but she had no longer any shadow of doubt that 
this girl of whom she was reading was herself She examined the photograph 
It was a blurred, nebulous thing, but quite unmistakable Besides, she had no 
need of the photograph to remind her She could remember everything- every 
circumstance of her life, up to that evening when she had come home tired out 
from Mr Warburton’s house, and, presumably, fallen asleep m the 
conservatory It was all so clear in her mind that it was almost incredible that 
she had ever forgotten it 

She ate no breakfast that day, and did not think to prepare anything for the 
midday meal; but when the time came, from force of habit, she set out for the 
hopfields with the other pickers With difficulty, being alone, she dragged the 
heavy bin into position, pulled the next bine down and began picking But 
after a few minutes she found that it was quite impossible, even the mechanical 
labour of picking was beyond her That horrible, lying story m Pippin’s 
Weekly had so unstrung her that it was impossible even for an instant to focus 
her mmd upon anything else Its lickerish phrases were going over and over m 
her head ‘Embraces of a passionate nature’-‘m scanty attire’ -‘under the 
influence of alcohol’-as each one came back into her memory it brought with it 
such a pang that she wanted to cry out as though m physical pam 

After a while she stopped even pretending to pick, let the bine fall across her 
bin, and sat down against one of the posts that supported the wires The other 
pickers observed her plight, and were sympathetic Ellen was a bit cut up, they 
said What else could you expect, after her bloke had been knocked ofiP 
(Everyone m the 'camp, Of course, had taken it for granted that Nobby was 
Dorothy’s lover ) They advised her to go down to the farm *and report sick 



A Clergyman's Daughter 331 

And towards twelve o’clock, when the measurer was due, everyone in the set 
came across with a hatful of hops and dropped it into her bin 

When the measurer arrived he found Dorothy still sitting on the ground 
Beneath her dirt and sunburn she was very pale, her face looked haggard, and 
much older than before Her bin was twenty yards behind the rest of the set, 
and there were less than three bushels of hops in it 

‘What’s the game?’ he demanded ‘You ilP’ 

‘No ’ 

‘Well, why ain’t you bin pickin’, then? What you think this is- toff s picnic? 
You don’t come up ’ere to sit about on the ground, you know ’ 

‘You cheese it and don’t get nagging of ’er'’ shouted the old cockney 
costerwoman suddenly ‘Can’t the pore girl ’ave a bit of rest and peace if she 
wants it? Ain’t ’er bloke m the clink thanks to you and your bloody nosing pals 
of coppers? She’s got enough to worry ’er ’thout being — about by every 
bloody copper’s nark in Kent 1 ’ 

‘That’ll be enough from you, Ma 1 ’ said the measurer gruffly, but he looked 
more sympathetic on hearing that it was Dorothy’s lover who had been arrested 
on the previous night When the costerwoman had got her kettle boiling she 
called Dorothy to her bin and gave her a cup of strong tea and a hunk of bread 
and cheese, and after the dinner interval another picker who had no partner 
was sent up to share Dorothy’s bin He was a small, weazened old tramp 
named Deafie Dorothy felt somewhat better after the tea Encouraged by 
Deafie’s example-for he was an excellent picker-she managed to do her fair 
share of work during the afternoon 

She had thought things over, and was less distracted than before The 
phrases m Pippin’s Weekly still made her wmce with shame, but she was equal 
now to facing the situation She understood well enough what had happened to 
her, and what had led to Mrs Semprill’s libel Mrs Sempnll had seen them 
together at the gate and had seen Mr Warburton kissing her, and after that, 
when they were both missing from Knype Hill, it was only too natural- natural 
for Mrs Sempnll, that ls-to infer that they had eloped together As for the 
picturesque details, she had invented them later Or had she invented them? 
That was the one thing you could never be certain of with Mrs 
Sempnll-whether she told her lies consciously and deliberately as lies, or 
whether, m her strange and disgusting mind, she somehow succeeded in 
believing them 

Well, anyway, the harm was done-no use worrying about it any longer. 
Meanwhile, there was the question of getting back to Knype Hill She would 
have to send for some clothes, and she would need two pounds for her tram 
fare home Home 1 The word sent a pang through her heart Home, after weeks 
of dirt and hunger 1 How she longed for it, now that she remembered it* 

But-' 

A chilly little doubt raised its head There was one aspect of the matter that 
she had not thought of till this moment Could she, after all, go home? Dared 
she? 

Could she face Knype Hill after everything that had happened? That was 



5 32 A Clergyman's D aught er 

the question When you have figured on the front page of Pippin's Weekly- m 
scanty attire’-‘under the influence of alcohol’-ah, don’t let’s think of it again' 
But when you have been plastered all over with horrible, dishonouring libels, 
can you go back to a town of two thousand inhabitants where everybody knows 
everybody else’s private history and talks about it all day long’ 

She did not know-could not decide At one moment it seemed to her that 
the story of her elopement was so palpably absurd that no one could possibly 
have believed it Mr War burton, for instance, could contradict lt-most 
certainly would contradict it, for every possible reason But the next moment 
she remembered that Mr Warburton had gone abroad, and unless this affair 
had got into the continental newspapers, he might not even have heard of it, 
and then she quailed again She knew what it means to have to live down a 
scandal in a small country town The glances and furtive nudges when you 
passed' The prying eyes following you down the street from behind curtained 
windows' The knots of youths on the corners round Blifil-Gordon’s factory, 
lewdly discussing you' 

‘George 1 Say, George' J’a see that bit of stuff over there’ With fair ’air’’ 

‘What, the skmny one’ Yes ’Oo’s she’’ 

‘Rector’s daughter, she is Miss ’Are But, say' What you think she done two 
years ago’ Done a bunk with a bloke old enough to bin ’er father Regular 
properly went on the razzle with ’im m Paris' Never think it to look at ’er, 
would you’’ 

‘Go on 1 ’ 

‘She did' Straight, she did It was m the papers and all Only ’e give ’er the 
chuck three weeks afterwards, and she come back ’ome again as bold as brass 
Nerve, eh’’ 

Yes, it would take some living down For years, for a decade it might be, they 
would be talking about her like that And the worst of it was that the story in 
Pippin's Weekly was probably a mere bowdlerized vestige of what Mrs 
Sempnll had been saying in the town Naturally, Pippin's Weekly had not 
wanted to commit itself too far But was there anything that would ever 
restrain Mrs Sempnll’ Only the limits of her imagmation-and they were 
almost as wide as the sky 

One thing, however, reassured Dorothy, and that was the thought that her 
father, at any rate, would do his best to shield her Of course, there would be 
others as well It was not as though she were friendless The church 
congregation, at least, knew her and trusted her, and the Mothers’ Union and 
the Girl Guides and the women on her visiting list would never believe such 
stories about her But it was her father who mattered most Almost any 
situation is bearable if you have a home to go back to and a family who will 
stand by you. With courage, and her father’s support, she might face things 
out By the evemng she had decided that it would be perfectly all right to go 
back to Knype Hill, though no doubt it would be disagreeable at first, and 
when work was over for the day she ‘subbed’ a shilling, and went down to the 
general shop in the village and bought a penny packet of notepaper Back m the 
camp, sitting on the grass by the fire-no tables or chairs in the camp, of 



333 


A Clergyman's Daughter 
course- she began to write with a stump of pencil 

Dearest Father,- 1 can’t tell you how glad I am, after everything that has happened, to be able to 
write to you again And I do hope you ’have not been too anxious about me or too worried by those 
horrible stories in the newspapers I don’t know what you must have thought when I suddenly 
disappeared like that and you didn’t hear from me for nearly a month But you see-’ 

How strange the pencil felt m her torn and stiffened fingers' She could only 
write a large, sprawling hand like that of a child But she wrote a long letter, 
explaining everything, and asking him to send her some clothes and two 
pounds for her fare home Also, she asked him to write to her under an 
assumed name she gave him- Ellen Millborough, after Millborough m 
Suffolk It seemed a queer thing to have to do, to use a false name, 
dishonest-criminal, almost But she dared not risk its being known m the 
village, and perhaps m the camp as well, that she was Dorothy Hare, the 
notorious ‘Rector’s Daughter 5 


6 


Once her mind was made up, Dorothy was pining to escape from the hop 
camp On the following day she could hardly bring herself to go on with the 
stupid work of picking, and the discomforts and bad food were intolerable now 
that she had memories to compare them with She would have taken to flight 
immediately if only she had had enough money to get her home The instant 
her father’s letter with the two pounds arrived, she would say good-bye to the 
Turles and take the tram for home, and breathe a sigh of relief to get there, m 
spite of the ugly scandals that had got to be faced. 

On the third day after writing she went down the village post office and asked 
for her letter The postmistress, a woman with the face of a dachshund and a 
bitter contempt for all hop-pickers, told her frostily that no letter had come 
Dorothy was disappointed A pity-it must have been held up in the post 
However, it didn’t matter; tomorrow would be soon enough-only another day 
to wait 

The next evemng she went again, quite certain that it would have arrived 
this time Still no letter This time a misgiving assailed her; and on the fifth 
evening, when there was yet agam no letter, the misgiving changed into a 
horrible panic She bought another packet of notepaper and wrote an 
enormous letter, using up the whole four sheets, explaining over and over 
again what had happened and imploring her father not to leave her in such 
suspense. Having posted it, she made up her mind that she would let a whole 
week go by before calling at the post office again 

This was Saturday, By Wednesday her resolve had broken down When the 
hooter sounded for the midday interval she left her bin and hurried down to 



334 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

the post office-it was a mile and a half away, and it meant missing her dinner 
Having got there she went shame-facedly up to the counter, almost afraid to 
speak The dog-faced postmistress was sitting m her brass-barred cage at the 
end of the counter, ticking figures m a long shaped account book She gave 
Dorothy a brief nosy glance and went on with her work, taking no notice of 
her 

Something painful was happening m Dorothy’s diaphragm She was finding 
it difficult to breathe, ‘Are there any letters for me 5 ’ she managed to say at last 
‘Name?’ said the postmistress, ticking away 
‘Ellen Millborough ’ 

The postmistress turned her long dachshund nose over her shoulder for an 
instant and glanced at the M partition of the Poste Restante letter-box 
‘No,’ she said, turning back to her account book 

In some manner Dorothy got herself outside and began to walk back 
towards the hopfields, then halted A deadly feeling of emptiness at the pit of 
her stomach, caused partly by hunger, made her too weak to walk 
Her father’s silence could mean only one thing He believed Mrs Semprill’s 
story-believed that she, Dorothy, had run away from home m disgraceful 
circumstances and then told lies to excuse herself He was too angry and too 
disgusted to write to her All he wanted was to get rid of her, drop all 
communication with her, get her out of sight and out of mind, as a mere 
scandal to be covered up and forgotten 
She could not go home after this She dared not Now that she had seen what 
her father’s attitude was, it had opened her eyes to the rashness of the thing she 
had been contemplating Of course she could not go home 1 To slink back in 
disgrace, to bring shame on her father’s house by coming there-ah, 
impossible, utterly impossible 1 How could she even have thought of it? 

What then? There was nothing for it but to go right away-nght away to 
some place that was big enough to hide m London, perhaps Somewhere 
where nobody knew her and the mere sight of her face or mention of her name 
would not drag into the light a string of dirty memories 
As she stood there the sound of bells floated towards her, from the village 
church round the bend of the road, where the ringers were amusing themselves 
by ringing ‘Abide with Me’, as one picks out a tune with one finger on the 
piano But presently ‘Abide with Me’ gave way to the familiar Sunday- 
morning jangle ‘Oh do leave my wife alone' She is so drunk she can’t get 
home'’-the same peal that the bells of St Athelstan’s had been used to ring 
three years ago before they were unswung The sound planted a spear of 
homesickness m Dorothy’s heart, bringing back to her with momentary 
vividness a medley of remembered things-the smell of the glue-pot in the 
conservatory when she was making costumes for the school play, and the 
chatter of starlings outside her bedroom window, interrupting her prayers 
before Holy Communion, and Mrs Pither’s doleful voice chronicling the pains 
m the backs of her legs, and the worries of the collapsing belfry and the shop- 
debts and the bindweed in the peas-all the multitudinous, urgent details of a 
life that had alternated between work and prayer 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 335 

Prayer' For a very short time, a minute perhaps, the thought arrested her 
Prayer-m those days it had been the very source and centre of her life In 
trouble or m happiness, it was to prayer that she had turned And she 
realized-the first time that it had crossed her mmd-that she had not uttered a 
prayer since leaving home, not even since her memory had come back to her 
Moreover, she was aware that she had no longer the smallest impulse to pray 
Mechanically, she began a whispered prayer, and stopped almost instantly, the 
words were empty and futile Prayer, which had been the mainstay of her life, 
had no meaning for her any longer She recorded this fact as she walked slowly 
up the road, and she recorded it briefly, almost casually, as though it had been 
something seen m passmg-a flower m the ditch or a bird crossing the 
road- something noticed and then dismissed She had not even the time to 
reflect upon what it might mean It was shouldered out of her mind by more 
momentous things 

It was of the future that she had got to be thinking now She was already 
fairly clear m her mind as to what she must do When the hop-picking was at an 
end she must go up to London, write to her father for money and her 
clothes-for however angry he might be, she could not believe that he intended 
to leave her utterly in the lurch-and then start looking for a job It was the 
measure of her ignorance that those dreaded words ‘looking for a job’ sounded 
hardly at all dreadful in her ears She knew herself strong and willmg-knew 
that there were plenty of jobs that she was capable of doing She could be a 
nursery governess, for instance-no, better, a housemaid or a parlourmaid 
There were not many things in a house that she could not do better than most 
servants, besides, the more menial her job, the easier it would be to keep her 
past history secret 

At any rate, her father’s house was closed to her, that was certain From now 
on she had got to fend for herself On this decision, with only a very dim idea of 
what it meant, she quickened her pace and got back to the fields m time for the 
afternoon shift 

The hop-picking season had not much longer to run In a week or 
thereabouts Cairns’s would be closing down, and the cockneys would take the 
hoppers’ tram to London, and the gypsies would catch their horses, pack their 
caravans, and march northward to Lincolnshire, to scramble for jobs in the 
potato fields As for the cockneys, they had had their bellyful of hop-picking by 
this time They were pining to be back m dear old London, with Woolworths 
and the fried-fish shop round the corner, and no more sleeping m straw and 
frymg bacon in tin lids with your eyes weeping from wood smoke Hoppmg 
was a holiday, but the kind of holiday that you were glad to see the last of You 
came down cheering, but you went home cheering louder still and swearing 
that you would never go hopping again-until next August, when you had 
forgotten the cold nights and the bad pay and the damage to your hands, and 
remembered only the blowsy afternoons m the sun and the boozmg of stone 
pots of beer round the red camp fires at night 

The mornings were growing bleak and Novembensh, grey skies, the first 
leaves falling, and finches and starlings already flocking for the winter- 



3j 6 A Clergyman 3 s Daughter 

Dorothy had written yet again to her father, asking for money and some 
clothes, he had left her letter unanswered, nor had anybody else written to her 
Indeed, there was no one except her father who knew her present address, but 
somehow she had hoped that Mr Warburton might write Her courage almost 
failed her now, especially at nights m the wretched straw, when she lay awake 
thinking of the vague and menacing future She picked her hops with a sort of 
desperation, a sort of frenzy of energy, more aware each day that every handful 
of hops meant another fraction of a farthing between herself and starvation 
Deafie, her bin-mate, like herself, was picking against time, for it was the last 
money he would earn till next year’s hopping season came round The figure 
they aimed at was five shillings a day- thirty bushels- between the two of them, 
but there was no day when they quite attained it 

Deafie was a queer old man and a poor companion after Nobby, but not a 
bad sort He was a ship’s steward by profession, but a tramp of many years’ 
i standmg, as deaf as a post and therefore something of a Mr F ’s aunt m 
conversation He was also an exhibitionist, but quite harmless For hours 
together he used to sing a little song that went ‘With my willy vn\\y~with my 
willy willy’, and though he could not hear what he was singing it seemed to 
cause him some kind of pleasure He had the hairiest ears Dorothy had ever 
seen There were tufts like miniature Dundreary whiskers growing out of each 
of his ears Every year Deafie came hop-picking at Cairns’s farm, saved up a 
pound, and then spent a paradisiac week m a lodging-house in Newington 
Butts before going back to the road This was the only week in the year when 
he slept in what could be called, except by courtesy, a bed 

The picking came to an end on 28 September There were several fields still 
unpicked, but they were poor hops and at the last moment Mr Cairns decided 
to ‘let them blow’ Set number 19 finished their last field at two in the 
afternoon, and the little gypsy foreman swarmed up the poles and retrieved the 
derelict bunches, and the measurer carted the last hops away As he 
disappeared there was a sudden shout of ‘Put ’em in the bins 1 ’ and Dorothy 
saw six men bearing down upon her with a fiendish expression on their faces, 
and all the women m the set scattermg and running Before she could collect 
her wits to escape the men had seized her, laid her at full length in a bin and 
swung her violently from side to side. Then she was dragged out and kissed by 
a young gypsy smelling of onions She struggled at first, but she saw the same 
thing being done to the other women m the set, so she submitted It appeared 
that putting the women in the bms was an invariable custom on the last day of 
picking There were great domgs in the camp that night, and not much sleep 
for anybody Long after midnight Dorothy found herself moving with a ring of 
people about a mighty fire, one hand clasped by a rosy butcher-boy and the 
other by a very drunk old woman in a Scotch bonnet out of a cracker, to the 
tune pf ‘Auld Lang Syne’, 

In the morning they went up to the farm to draw their money, and Dorothy 
drew one pound and fourpence, and earned another fivepence by adding up 
their tally books for people who could not read or write The cockney pickers 
paid you a penny for this job; the gypsies paid you only in flattery Then 



A Clergyman's Daughter 3 37 

Dorothy set out for West Ackworth station, four miles away, together with the 
Turles, Mr Turle carrying the tin trunk, Mrs Turle carrying the baby, the 
other children carrying various odds and ends, and Dorothy wheeling the 
perambulator which held the Turles’ entire stock of crockery, and which had 
two circular wheels and two elliptical 
They got to the station about midday, the hoppers’ train was due to start at 
one, and it arrived at two and started at a quarter past three After a journey of 
incredible slowness, zigzagging all over Kent to pick up a dozen hop-pickers 
here and half a dozen there, going back on its tracks over and over again and 
backing into sidings to let other trains pass-taking, in fact, six hours to do 
thirty-five miles-it landed them m London a little after nine at night 


7 


Dorothy slept that night with the Turles They had grown so fond of her that 
they would have given her shelter for a week or a fortnight if she had been 
willing to impose on their hospitality Their two rooms (they lived in a 
tenement house not far from Tower Bridge Road) were a tight fit for seven 
people including children, but they made her a bed of sorts on the floor out of 
two rag mats, an old cushion and an overcoat 

In the morning she said good-bye to the Turles and thanked them for all 
their kindness towards her, and then went straight to Bermondsey public baths 
and washed off the accumulated dirt of five weeks After that she set out to look 
for a lodging, having m her possession sixteen and eightpence m cash, and the 
clothes she stood up in She had darned and cleaned her clothes as best she 
could, and being black they did not show the dirt quite as badly as they might 
have done From the knees down she was now passably respectable On the last 
day of picking a ‘home picker’ m the next set, named Mrs Killfrew, had 
presented her with a good pair of shoes that had been her daughter’s, and a pair 
of woollen stockings 

It was not until the evemng that Dorothy managed to find herself a room 
For something like ten hours she was wandering up and down, from 
Bermondsey into Southwark, from Southwark into Lambeth, through 
labyrinthine streets where snotty-nosed children played at hop-scotch on 
pavements homble with banana skins and decaying cabbage leaves. At every 
house she tried it was the same story-the landlady refused point-blank to take 
her in One after another a succession of hostile women, standing in then 
doorways as defensively as though she had been a motor bandit or a 
government inspector, looked her up and down, said briefly, ‘We don’t take 
single girls,’ and shut the door m her face. She did not know it, of course, but 
the very took of her was enough to rouse any respectable landlady’s suspicions 



3j8 A Clergyman's Daughter 

Her stained and ragged clothes they might possibly have put up with, but the 
fact that she had no luggage damned her from the start A single girl with no 
luggage is invariably a bad lot-this is the first and greatest of the apophthegms 
of the London landlady 

At about seven o’clock, too tired to stand on her feet any longer, she 
ventured into a filthy, flyblown little caf i near the Old Vic theatre and asked 
for a cup of tea The proprietress, getting into conversation with her and 
learning that she wanted a room, advised her to ‘try at Mary’s, in Wellmgs 
Court, jest orff the Cut’ ‘Mary’, it appeared, was not particular and would let a 
room to anybody who could pay Her proper name was Mrs Sawyer, but the 
boys all called her Mary 

Dorothy found Wellmgs Court with some difficulty You went along 
Lambeth Cut till you got to a Jew clothes-shop called Knockout Trousers Ltd, 
then you turned up a narrow alley, and then turned to your left again up 
another alley so narrow that its grimy plaster walls almost brushed you as you 
went In the plaster, persevering boys had cut the word — innumerable times 
and too deeply to be erased At the far end of the alley you found yourself m a 
small court where four tall narrow houses with iron staircases stood facing one 
another 

Dorothy made inquiries and found ‘Mary’ in a subterranean den beneath 
one of the houses She was a drabby old creature with remarkably thm hair and 
face so emaciated that it looked like a rouged and powdered skull Her voice 
was cracked, shrewish, and nevertheless ineffably dreary She asked Dorothy 
no questions, and indeed scarcely even looked at her, but simply demanded ten 
shillings and then said m her ugly voice 

‘Twenty-nine Third floor Go up be the back stairs ’ 

Apparently the back stairs were those inside the house Dorothy went up the 
dark, spiral staircase, between sweating walls, in a smell of old overcoats, 
dishwater and slops As she reached the second floor there was a loud squeal of 
laughter, and two rowdy-looking girls came out of one of the rooms and stared 
at her for a moment They looked young, their faces being quite hidden under 
rouge and pink powder, and their lips painted scarlet as geranium petals But 
amid the pink powder their china-blue eyes were tired and old; and that was 
somehow horrible, because it reminded you of a girl’s mask with an old 
woman’s face behind it The taller of the two greeted Dorothy 
‘’Ullo, dearie 1 ’ 

‘Hullo 1 ’ 

‘You new ’ere? Which room you kipping in?’ 

‘Number twenty-nine ’ 

‘God, ain’t that a bloody dungeon to put you in' You going out tonight?’ 
‘No, I don’t think so,’ said Dorothy, privately a little astomshed at the 
question, ‘I’m too tired ’ 

‘Thought you wasn’t, when I saw you ’adn’t dolled up But, say 1 dearie, you 
ain’t on the beach, are you? Not spoiling the ship for a ’aporth of tar? Because 
fnnstance if you Want the lend of a lipstick, you only got to say the word 
We’re all chums ’ere, you know ’ 



A Clergyman’ s Daughter 339 

‘Oh No, thank you/ said Dorothy, taken aback 

‘Oh, well 1 Time Dons and me was moving Got a ’portant business 
engagement m Leicester Square 5 Here she nudged the other girl with her hip, 
and both of them sniggered m a silly mirthless manner ‘But, say ! ’ added the 
taller girl confidentially, ‘ain’t it a bloody treat to ’ave a good night’s kip all 
alone once m a way^ Wish I could All on your Jack Jones with no bloody great 
man’s feet shoving you about ’S all right when you can afford it, eh^’ 

‘Yes,’ said Dorothy, feeling that this answer was expected of her, and with 
only a very vague notion of what the other was talking about 

‘Well, ta ta, dearie 1 Sleep tight And jes’ look out for the smash and grab 
raiders ’bout ’ar-parse onei’ 

When the two girls had skipped downstairs with another of their 
meaningless squeals of laughter, Dorothy found her way to room number 29 
and opened the door A cold, evil smell met her The room measured about 
eight feet each way, and was very dark The furmture was simple. In the 
middle of the room, a narrow iron bedstead with a ragged coverlet and greyish 
sheets, agamst the wall, a packing case with a tin basin and an empty whisky 
bottle intended for water, tacked over the bed, a photograph of Bebe Daniels 
torn out of Film Fun 

The sheets were not only dirty, but damp Dorothy got into the bed, but she 
had only undressed to her chemise, or what was left of her chemise, her 
underclothes by this time being almost entirely in rums, she could not bring 
herself to lay her bare body between those nauseous sheets And once m bed, 
though she was aching from head to foot with fatigue, she could not sleep She 
was unnerved and full of forebodings The atmosphere of this vile place 
brought home to her more vividly than before the fact that she was helpless 
and friendless and had only six shillings between herself and the streets 
Moreover, as the night wore on the house grew noisier and noisier The walls 
were so thin that you could hear everything that was happening There were 
bursts of shrill idiotic laughter, hoarse male voices singing, a gramophone 
drawling out limericks, noisy kisses, strange deathlike groans, and once or 
twice the violent rattling of an iron bed T owards midnight the noises began to 
form themselves into a rhythm m Dorothy’s bram, and she fell lightly and 
unrestfully asleep She was woken about a minute later, as it seemed, by her 
door being flung open, and two dimly seen female shapes rushed in, tore every 
scrap of clothing from her bed except the sheets, and rushed out again. There 
was a chronic shortage of blankets at ‘Mary’s’, and the only way of getting 
enough of them was to rob somebody else’s bed Hence the term ’smash and 
grab raiders’ 

In the morning, half an hour before opening time, Dorothy went to the 
nearest public library to look at the advertisements in the newspapers Already 
a score of vaguely mangy-lookmg people were prowling up and down, and the 
number swelled by ones and twos till there were no less than sixty Presently 
the doors of the library opened, and in they all surged, racing for a board at the 
other end of the reading-room where the ‘Situations Vacant’ columns from 
various newspapers had been cut out .and pinned up A*|d in the wake of the 



A Clergyman's Daughter 

job-hunters came poor old bundles of rags, men and women both., who had 
spent the night in the streets and came to the library to sleep They came 
shambling m behind the others, flopped down with grunts of relief at the 
nearest table, and pulled the nearest periodical towards them, it might be the 
Free Church Messenger , it might be the Vegetarian Sentmel-it didn’t matter 
what it was, but you couldn’t stay m the library unless you pretended to be 
reading They opened their papers, and m the same instant fell asleep, with 
their chins on their breasts And the attendant walked round prodding them m 
turn like a stoker poking a succession of fires, and they grunted and woke up as 
he prodded them, and then fell asleep again the instant he had passed 

Meanwhile a battle was raging round the advertisement board, everybody 
struggling to get to the front Two young men in blue overalls came running 
up behmd the others, and one of them put his head down and fought his way 
through the crowd as though it had been a football scrum In a moment he was 
at the board He turned to his companion £ ’Ere we are, Joe- 1 got it' 
“Mechanics wanted-Locke’s Garage, Camden Town ” C’m on out of it 1 ’ He 
fought his way out again, and both of them scooted for the door They were 
going to Camden Town as fast as their legs would carry them And at this 
moment, m every public library in London, mechanics out of work were 
reading that identical notice and starting on the race for the job, which in all 
probability had already been given to someone who could afford to buy a paper 
for himself and had seen the notice at six in the morning 

Dorothy managed to get to the board at last, and made a note of some of the 
addresses where ‘cook generals’ were wanted There were plenty to choose 
from-indeed, half the ladies m London seemed to be crying out for strong 
capable general servants With a list of twenty addresses m her pocket, and 
having had a breakfast of bread and margarine and tea which cost her 
threepence, Dorothy set out to look for a job, not unhopefully 

She was too ignorant as yet to know that her chances of finding work 
unaided were practically ml, but the next four days gradually enlightened her 
During those four days she applied for eighteen jobs, and sent written 
applications for four others She trudged enormous distances all through the 
southern suburbs: Clapham, Brixton, Dulwich, Penge, Sydenham, Becken- 
ham, Norwood-even as far as Croydon on one occasion She was haled into 
neat suburban drawing-rooms and interviewed by women of every 
conceivable type-large, chubby, bullying women, thm, acid, catty women, 
alert frigid women m gold pince-nez , vague rambling women who looked as 
though they practised vegetarianism or attended spiritualist stances And one 
and all, fat or thm, chilly or motherly, they reacted to her m precisely the same 
way They simply looked her over, heard her speak, stared inquisitively, asked 
her a dozen embarrassing and impertinent questions, and then turned her 
down. 

Any experienced person could have told her how it would be In her 
circumstances it was not to be expected that anyone would take the risk of 
employing her. Her ragged clothes and her lack of references were against her, 
and her educated accent, which she did not know how to disguise, wrecked 



A Clergyman's Daughter 341 

whatever chances she might have had The tramps and cockney hop-pickers 
had not noticed hei accent, but the suburban housewives noticed it quickly 
enough, and it scared them in just the same way as the fact that she had no 
luggage had scared the landladies The moment they had heard her speak, and 
spotted her for a gentlewoman, the game was up She grew quite used to the 
startled, mystified look that came over their faces as soon as she opened her 
mouth-the prying, feminine glance from her face to her damaged hands, and 
from those to the darns m her skirt Some of the women asked her outright 
what a girl of her class was doing seeking work as a servant They sniffed, no 
doubt, that she had ‘been m trouble 5 -that is, had an illegitimate baby-and 
after probing her with their questions they got rid of her as quickly as possible 

As soon as she had an address to give Dorothy had written to her father, and 
when on the third day no answer came, she wrote again, despairingly this 
time-it was her fifth letter, and four had gone unanswered-telling him that 
she must starve if he did not send her money at once There was just time for 
her to get an answer before her week at ‘Mary’s 9 was up and she was thrown 
out for not paying her rent 

Meanwhile, she continued the useless search for work, while her money 
dwindled at the rate of a shilling a day-a sum just sufficient to keep her alive 
while leaving her chronically hungry She had almost given up the hope that 
her father would do anything to help her And strangely enough her first panic 
had died down, as she grew hungrier and the chances of getting a job grew 
remoter, into a species of miserable apathy She suffered, but she was not 
greatly afraid The sub-world into which she was descending seemed less 
terrible now that it was nearer 

The autumn weather, though fine, was growing colder Each day the sun, 
fighting his losing battle against the winter, struggled a little later through the 
mist to dye the house-fronts with pale aquarelle colours Dorothy was m the 
streets all day, or in the public library, only going back to ‘Mary’s’ to sleep, and 
then taking the precaution of dragging her bed across the door She had 
grasped by this time that ‘Mary’s’ was-not actually a brothel, for there is 
hardly such a thing m London, but a well-known refuge of prostitutes It was 
for that reason that you paid ten shillings a week for a kennel not worth five 
Old ‘Mary’ (she was not the proprietress of the house, merely the manageress) 
had been a prostitute herself m her day, and looked it Living in such a place 
damned you even m the eyes of Lambeth Cut Women sniffed when you 
passed them, men took an offensive interest m you The Jew on the comer, the 
owner of Knockout Trousers Ltd, was the worst of all He was a solid young 
man of about thirty, with bulging red cheeks and curly black hair like 
astrakhan For twelve hours a day he stood on the pavement roaring with 
brazen lungs that you couldn’t get a cheaper pair of trousers in London, and 
obstructing the passers-by You had only to halt for a fraction of a second, and 
he seized you by the arm and bundled you inside the shop by mam force. Once 
he got you there his manner became positively threatening If you said 
anything disparaging about his trousers he offered to fight, and weak-minded 
people bought pairs of trousers m sheer physical terror But busy though he 



342 A Clergyman 3 s Daughter 

was, he kept a sharp eye open for the ‘birds’, as he called them, and Dorothy 
appeared to fascinate him beyond all other ‘birds’ He had grasped that she was 
not a prostitute, but living at ‘Mary’s’, she must-so he reasoned-be on the 
very verge of becoming one The thought made his mouth water When he saw 
her coming down the alley he would post himself at the corner, with his 
massive chest well displayed and one black lecherous eye turned inquiringly 
upon her (‘Are you ready to begin yet 5 ’ his eye seemed to be saying), and, as 
she passed, give her a discreet pinch on the backside 

On the last morning of her week at ‘Mary’s’, Dorothy went downstairs and 
looked, with only a faint flicker of hope, at the slate m the hallway where the 
names of people for whom there were letters were chalked up There was no 
letter for ‘Ellen Millborough’ That settled it, there was nothing left to do 
except to walk out into the street It did not occur to her to do as every other 
woman in the house would have done-that is, pitch a hard-up tale and try to 
cadge another mght’s lodging rent free She simply walked out of the house, 
and had not even the nerve to tell ‘Mary’ that she was going 

She had no plan, absolutely no plan whatever Except for half an hour at 
noon when she went out to spend threepence out of her last fourpence on bread 
and margarine and tea, she passed the entire day m the public library, reading 
weekly papers In the morning she read the Barber’s Record , and in the 
afternoon Cage Birds They were the only papers she could get hold of, for 
there were always so many idlers in the library that you had to scramble to get 
hold of a paper at all She read them from cover to cover, even the 
advertisements She pored for hours together over such technicalities as How 
to strop French Razors, Why the Electric Hairbrush is Unhygienic, Do 
Budgies thrive on Rapeseed 5 It was the only occupation that she felt equal to 
She was in a strange lethargic state in which it was easier to interest herself in 
How to strop French Razors than m her own desperate plight All fear had left 
her Of the future she was utterly unable to thmk, even so far ahead as tonight 
she could barely see There was a night m the streets ahead of her, that was all 
she knew, and even about that she only vaguely cared Meanwhile there were 
Cage Birds and the Barber’s Record , and they were, strangely, absorbingly 
interestmg 

At nine o’clock the attendant came round with a long hooked pole and 
turned out the gaslights, the library was closed Dorothy turned to the left, up 
the Waterloo Road, towards the river On the iron footbridge she halted for a 
moment The mght wind was blowing Deep banks of mist, like dunes, were 
rising from the river, and, as the wind caught them, swirling north-eastward 
across the town A swirl of mist enveloped Dorothy, penetrating her thm 
clothes and making her shudder with a sudden foretaste of the night’s cold 
She walked on and arrived, by the process of gravitation that draws all roofless 
people to the same spot, at Trafalgar Square 



CHAPTER 3 
I 


[scene Trafalgar Square Dimly visible through the mist , a dozen people, 
Dorothy among them, are grouped about one of the benches near the north 
parapet ] 

Charlie [singing] ’Ail Mary, ’ail Mary, ’a-i 1 Ma-ary - [Big Ben strikes ten ] 
snouter [mimicking the noise ] Ding dong, dmg dong' Shut your — noise, can’t 
you? Seven more hours of it on this — square before we get the chance of a 
setdown and a bit of sleep 1 Gripes' 

MR tallboys [to himself] Non sum quahs eram bom sub regno Edwardi In the 
days of my innocence, before the Devil earned me up into a high place and 
dropped me into the Sunday newspapers- that is to say when I was Rector of 
Little Fawley-cum-Dewsbury 
deafie [singing] With my willy willy, with my willy willy — 
mrs wayne Ah, dearie, as soon as I set eyes on you I knew as you was a lady 
born and bred You and me’ve known what it is to come down m the world, 
haven’t we, dearie? It ain’t the same for us as what it is for some of these 
others here 

Charlie [singing]. ’Ail Mary, ’ail Mary, ’a-il Ma-ary, full of grace' 
mrs bendigo Calls himself a bloody husband, does he? Four pound a week m 
Covent Garden and ’is wife doing a starry m the bloody Square' Husband! 
mr tallboys [to himself] Happy days, happy days' My ivied church under the 
sheltering hillside-my red-tiled Rectory slumbering among Elizabethan 
yews' My library, my vinery, my cook, house-parlourmaid and groom- 
gardener' My cash in the bank, my name in Crockford' My black suit of 
irreproachable cut, my collar back to front, my watered silk cassock m the 
church precincts 

mrs wayne Of course the one thing I do thank God for, dearie, is that my poor 
dear mother never lived to see this day Because if she ever had of lived to see 
the day when her eldest daughter-as was brought up, mind you, with no 
expense spared and milk straight from the cow . 
mrs bendigo Husband ’ 

ginger Come on, less ’ave a drum of tea while we got the chance Last we’ll 
get tonight-coffee shop shuts at ’ar-parse ten 
the kike Oh Jesus' This bloody cold’s gonna kill me' I ain’t got nothing on 
under my trousers Oh Je-e-e-eese' 

Charlie [singing] ’Ail Mary, ’ail Mary- 

snouter* Fourpence! Fourpence for six — hours on the bum' And thatthere 



244 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

nosing sod with the wooden leg queering our pitch at every boozer between 
Aldgate and the Mile End Road With ’is — wooden leg and ’is war medals 
as ’e bought m Lambeth Cut 1 Bastard 1 
deafie [singing] With my willy willy, with my willy willy- 
mrs bendigo Well, I told the bastard what I thought of ’im, anyway ‘Call 
yourself a man’’ I says ‘I’ve seen things like you kep’ m a bottle at the 
’orspital,’ I says 

mr tallboys [ to himself] Happy days, happy days 1 Roast beef and bobbing 
villagers, and the peace of God that passeth all understanding* Sunday 
mornings in my oaken stall, cool flower scent and frou-frou of surplices 
mingling in the sweet corpse-laden air* Summer evenings when the late sun 
slanted through my study window - 1 pensive, boozed with tea, in fragrant 
wreaths of Cavendish, thumbing drowsily some half-calf volume- Poetical 
Works of William Shenstone 3 Esq , Percy’s Reliques of Ancient English Poetry , 
J Lempnere, d d , professor of immoral theology 
ginger Come on, ’oo’s for that drum of riddleme-ree’ We got the milk and we 
got the tea Question is, ’oo’s got any bleeding sugar’ 

Dorothy This cold, this cold 1 It seems to go right through you 1 Surely it 
won’t be like this all night’ 

mrs bendigo Oh, cheese it* I ’ate these snivelling tarts 
Charlie Ain’t it going to be a proper pensher, too’ Look at the perishing river 
mist creeping up that there column Freeze the fish-hooks off of ole Nelson 
before morning 

mrs wayne Of course, at the time that I’m speaking of we still had our little 
tobacco and sweetstuff business on the corner, you’ll understand 
the kike Oh J e-e-e-eeze* Lend’s that overcoat of yours. Ginger I’m bloody 
freezing* 

snouter — dotible-crossing bastard* P’raps I won’t bash ’is navel m when I 
get a ’old of ’im* 

Charlie Fortunes o’ war, boy, fortunes o’ war Perishing Square tomght- 
rumpsteak and kip on feathers tomorrow What else d’you expect on 
perishing Thursday’ 

mrs bendigo Shove up. Daddy, shove up* Think I want your lousy old ’ed on 
my shoulder-me a married woman’ 

mr tallboys [ to himself] For preaching, chanting, and intoning I was 
unrivalled My ‘Lift up your Hearts’ was renowned throughout the diocese 
All styles I could do you. High Church, Low Church, Broad Church and No 
Church Throaty Anglo-Cat Warblmgs, straight from the shoulder 
muscular Anglican, or the adenoidal Low Church whine in which still lurk 
the Houyhnhnm-notes of neighing chapel elders 
deafie [singing]' With my willy willy- 

ginger* Take your ’ands off that bleeding overcoat, Kikie You don’t get no 
clo’es of mine while you got the chats on you 
Charlie [singing]. 

As pants the ’art for cooling streams. 

When ’eated m the chase- 



A Clergyman's Daughter 343 

mrs mcelligot [in her sleep] Was ’at you, Michael dear? 
mrs Bendigo It’s my belief as the sneaking bastard ’ad another wife living 
when ’e married me 

MR tallboys [from the roof of his mouth , stage curate-wise, reminiscently ] If any 
of you know cause of just impediment why these two persons should not be 
joined together m holy matrimony 
the kike A pal' A bloody pal 1 And won’t lend his bloody overcoat' 
mrs wayne Well, now as you’ve mentioned it, I must admit as I never was one 
to refuse a nice cup of tea I know that when our poor dear mother was alive, 
pot after pot we used to 

nosy watson [to himself ', angrily] Sod' Gee’d into it and then a stretch all 
round Never even done the bloody job Sod' 
deafie [singing] With my willy willy- 

mrs mcelligot [half asleep] Dear Michael He was real loving, Michael 
was Tender an’ true Never looked at another man since dat evenin’ 
when I met’m outside Kronk’s slaughter-house an’ he gimme de two pound 
o’ sausage as he’d bummed off de International Stores for his own 
supper 

mrs bendigo Well, I suppose we’ll get that bloody tea this time tomorrow 
mr tallboys [chanting, reminiscently] By the waters of Babylon we sat down 
and wept, when we remembered thee, O Zion' 

DOROTHY' Oh, this cold, this cold' 

snouter Well, I don’t do no more — starries this side of Christmas I’ll ’ave 
my kip tomorrow if I ’ave to cut it out of their bowels 
nosy watson Detective, is he? Smith of the Flying Squad' Flying Judas more 
likely' All they can bloody do-copping the old offenders what no beak won’t 
give a fair chance 

ginger Well, I’m off for the fiddlede-dee ’Oo’s got a couple of clods for the 
water? 

mrs mcelligot [waking] Oh dear, oh dear' If my back ain’t fair broke' Oh holy 
Jesus, if dis bench don’t catch you across de kidneys' An’ dere was me 
dreamin’ I was warm m kip wid a nice cup a’ tea an’ two o’ buttered toast 
waitin’ by me bedside Well, dere goes me last wink 0’ sleep till I gets into 
Lambeth public lib’ry tomorrow 

daddy [his head emerging from within his overcoat like a tortoise's from within its 
shell] Wassat you said, boy? Paying money for water' How long’ve you bin 
on the road, you ignorant young scut? Money for bloody water? Bum it, boy, 
bum it' Don’t buy what you can bum and don’t bum what you can steal 
That’s my word-fifty year on the road, man and boy* [Retires within his 
coat ] 

mr tallboys [chanting]: O all ye works of the Lord- 
deafie [singing] With my willy willy- 
charlIe: ’Oo was it copped you* Nosy? 
the kike Oh Je-e-e-eeae! 

mrs bendigo, Shoveup, shove up! Seems to me some folks think they’ve took a 
mortgage on this bloody seat 



A Clergyman ’s Daughter 

mr tallboys [ chanting ] O all ye works of the Lord, curse ye the Lord, curse 
Him and vilify Him for ever 1 

mrs mcelligot What I always says is, it’s always us poor bloody Catholics 
dat’s down in de bloody dumps 

nosy watson Smithy Flying Squad-flying sod 1 Give us the plans of the 
house and everything, and then had a van full of coppers waiting and nipped 
the lot of us I wrote it up m the Black Maria 

‘Detective Smith knows how to gee, 

Tell him he’s a — from me ’ 

snouter ’Ere, what about our — tea? Go on, Kikie, you’re a young ’un, shut 
that — noise and take the drums Don’t you pay nothing Worm it out of the 
old tart Snivel Do the doleful 

mr tallboys [ chanting ] O all ye children of men, curse ye the Lord, curse Him 
and vilify Him for ever 1 
charlie What, is Smithy crooked too? 

mrs bendigo I tell you what, girls, I tell you what gets me down, and that’s to 
think of my bloody husband snoring under four blankets and me freezing in 
this bloody Square That’s what I can’t stomach The unnatural sod 1 
ginger [singing] There they go -in their joy-Don’t take that there drum with 
the cold sausage m it, Kikie 

nosy watson Crooked? Crooked ? Why, a corkscrew ’ud look like a bloody 
bradawl beside of him 1 There isn’t one of them double — sons of whores in 
the Flying Squad but ’ud sell his grandmother to the knackers for two pound 
ten and then sit on her gravestone eating potato crisps The geemg, narking 
toe rag 1 

charlie Perishing tough ’Ow many convictions you got? 
ginger [singing] 

There they go -in their joy- 
’Appy girl-lucky boy- 

nosy watson Fourteen You don’t stand no chance with that lot against you 

mrs wayne What, don’t he keep you, then? 

mrs bendigo No, I’m married to this one, sod ’im ! 

charlie I got perishing nine myself 

mr tallboys [ chanting ] O Ananias, Azanas and Misael, curse ye the Lord, 
curse Him and vilify Him for ever 1 
ginger [singing] 

There they go -m their joy- 
’Appy girl-focky boy- 
But ’ere am /-/-/- 
Broken— ’a-a-aarted 1 

God, I ain’t ’ad a dig in the grave forthree days ’Ow long since you washed 
your face, Snouter? 

mrs mcelligot' Oh dear, oh dear 1 If dat boy don’t come soon wid de tea me 
insides’ll dry up like a bloody kippered herring 
charlie. You can’t sing, none of you Ought to ’ear Snouter and me ’long 
towards Christmas time when we pipe up ‘Good King Wenceslas’ outside 



A Clergyman' s Daughter 347 

the boozers ’Ymns, too Blokes in the bar weep their perishing eyes out to 
’ear us ’Member when we tapped twice at the same ’ouse by mistake, 
Snouter? Old tart fair tore the innards out of us 
MR tallboys [ marching up and down behind an imaginary drum and singing ] 

All things vile and damnable, 

All creatures great and small- 
[Big Ben strikes half past ten ] 

snouter [mimicking the clock ] Ding dong, ding dong’ Six and a — half hours 
of it’ Cnpes’ 

ginger Kikie and me knocked off four of them safety-razor blades in 
Woolworth’s ’s afternoon I’ll ’ave a dig in the bleeding fountains tomorrow 
if I can bum a bit of soap 

deafie When I was a stooard m the P & O , we used to meet them black 
Indians two days out at sea, m them there great canoes as they call 
catamarans, catching sea-turtles the size of dinner tables 
mrs wayne Did yoo used to be a clergyman, then, sir? 
mr tallboys [halting] After the order of Melchizedec There is no question of 
‘used to be’. Madam Once a priest always a priest Hoc est corpus hocus- 
pocus Even though unfrocked-un-Crocked, we call lt-and dog-collar 
publicly torn off by the bishop of the diocese 
ginger [singing] There they go-zn their joy-Thank Christ’ ’Ere comes Kikie 
Now for the consultation-free’ 
mrs bendigo Not before it’s bloody needed 

Charlie ’Ow come they give you the sack, mate? Usual story? Choirgirls m the 
family way? 

mrs mcelligot You’ve took your time, ain’t you, young man? But come on, 
let’s have a sup of it before me tongue falls out 0’ me bloody mouth 
mrs bendigo Shove up, Daddy’ You’re sitting on my packet of bloody sugar 
mr tallboys Girls is a euphemism Only the usual flannel-bloomered hunters 
of the unmarried clergy Church hens- altar-dressers and brass- 
polishers- spinsters growing bony and desperate There is a demon that 
enters mto them at thirty-five 

the kike The old bitch wouldn’t give me the hot water Had to tap a toff m the 
street and pay a penny for it 

snouter — likely story' Bin swigging it on the way more likely 
daddy [emerging from his overcoat] Drum o’ tea, eh? I could sup a drum o’ tea 
[Belches slightly ] 

Charlie When their bubs get like perishing razor stops? I know 
nosy watson Tea-bloody catlap Better’n that cocoa in the stir, though 
Lend’s your cup, matie 

ginger Jest wait’ll I knock a ’ole m this tin of milk Shy us a money or your 
life, someone 

mrs bendigo* Easy with that bloody sugar’ ’Oo paid for it, I sh’d like to know? 
mr tallboys When their bubs get like razor stops. I thank thee for that 
humour. Pippin’s Weekly made quite a feature of the case. ‘Missing Canon’s 
Sub Rosa Romance Intimate Revelations . ’ And also an Open Letter in JoJm 



248 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

Bull ‘To a Skunk in Shepherd’s Clothing’ A pity-I was marked out for 
preferment [To Dorothy] Gaiters m the family, if you understand me You 
would not think, would you, that the time has been when this unworthy 
backside dented the plush cushions of a cathedral stall? 
charlie ’Ere comes Florry Thought she’d be along soon as we got the tea 
going Got a nose like a perishing vulture for tea, that girl ’as 
snouter Ay, always on the tap [ Singing ] 

Tap, tap, tappety tap. 

I’m a perfec’ devil at that- 

mrs mcelligot De poor kid, she ain’t got no sense Why don’t she go up to 
Piccadilly Circus where she’d get her five bob reg’lar? She won’t do herself 
no good bummm’ round de Square wid a set of miserable ole Tobies 
dorothy Is that milk all right? 

ginger All right? [Applies his mouth to one of the holes in the tin and blows A 
sticky greyish stream dribbles from the other ] 
charlie What luck, Florry? ’Ow ’bout that perishing toff as I see you get off 
with just now? 

dorothy It’s got ‘Not fit for babies’ on it 

mrs bendigo Well, you ain’t a bloody baby, are you? You can drop your 
Buckingham Palace manners, ’ere, dearie 
florry Stood me a coffee and a fag-mingy bastard 1 That tea you got there, 
Ginger? You always was my favourite, Gmger dear 
MRS wayne There’s jest thirteen of us 

mr tallboys As we are not going to have any dinner you need not disturb 
yourself 

ginger What-o, ladies and gents' Tea is served Cups forward, please 1 
the kike Oh Jeez' You ain’t filled my bloody cup half full' 
mrs mcelligot Well, here’s luck to us all, an’ a better bloody kip tomorrow 
I’d ha’ took shelter in one o’ dem dere churches meself, only de b — s won’t 
let you m if so be as dey t’ink you got de chats on you [. Drinks ] 
mrs wayne Well, I can’t say as this is exactly the way as I’ve been accustomed 
to drinking a cup of tea-but still- [Drinks ] 
charlie Perishing good cup of tea [Drinks ] 

deafie And there was flocks of them there green parakeets m the coco-nut 
palms, too [Drinks ] 

MR tallboys 

What potions have I drunk of siren tears. 

Distilled from limbecs foul as Hell within' 

[Drinks ] 

snouter Last we’ll get till five in the — morning [Drinks ] 

[Florry produces a broken shop-made cigarette from her stocking , and cadges 
a match The men , except Daddy , Deafie , and Mr Tallboys , roll cigarettes 
from picked-up fag-ends The red ends glow through the misty twilight, like a 
crooked constellation , as the smokers sprawl on the bench, the ground, or the 
slope of the parapet ] 

mrs wayne Well, there now' A nice cup of tea do seem to warm you up, don’t 



A Clergyman's Daughter 349 

it, now? Not but what I don’t feel it a bit different, as you might say, not 
having no nice clean table-cloth like I’ve been accustomed to, and the 
beautiful china tea service as our mother used to have, and always, of course, 
the very best tea as money could buy-real Pekoe Points at two and nine a 
pound 

ginger [singing] 

There they go-m their joy- 
’Appy girl— lucky boy- 

mr tallboys [singing, to the tune of ‘Deutschland, Deutschland uber alles’] 
Keep the aspidistra flying- 
charlie ’Ow long you two kids been m Smoke? 

snouter I’m going to give them boozers such a doing tomorrow as they won’t 
know if theyr’e on their ’eads or their — ’eels I’ll ’ave my ’alf dollar if I ’ave 
to ’old them upside down and — shake ’em. 
ginger Three days We come down from York- skippering ’alf the way God, 
wasn’t it jest about bleeding nine carat gold, too 1 
florry Got any more tea there, Ginger dear? Well, so long, folks See you all 
at Wilkins’s tomorrow morning 

mrs bendigo Thieving little tart’ Swallers ’er tea and then jacks off without so 
much as a thank you Can’t waste a bloody moment 
mrs mcelligot Cold? Ay, I b’lieve you Skipperin’ m de long grass wid no 
blanket an’ de bloody dew fit to drown you, an’ den can’t get your bloody fire 
going’ in de mornm’, an’ got to tap de milkman ’fore you can make yourself a 
drum o’ tea I’ve had some’v it when me and Michael was on de toby 
mrs bendigo Even go with blackies and Chinamen she will, the dirty little 
cow 

dorothy How much does she get each time? 
snouter Tanner 
dorothy Sixpence ? 

charlie Bet your life Do it for a perishing fag along towards mormng 
mrs mcelligot I never took less’n a shilling, never 

ginger Kikie and me skippered in a boneyard one night Woke up in the 
morning and found I was lying on a bleeding gravestone 
the kike She ain’t half got the crabs on her, too 

mrs mcelligot Michael an’ me skippered in a pigsty once We was just a- 
creepm’ m, when, ‘Holy Mary 1 ’ says Michael, ‘dere’s a pig in here 1 ’ ‘Pig 
be — f ’ I says, ‘he’ll keep us warm anyway ’ So m we goes, an’ dere was an old 
sow lay on her side snorin’ like a traction engine I creeps up agen her an’ 
puts me arms round her, an’ begod she kept me warm all night I’ve 
skippered worse 

deafie [singing] With my willy willy- 

charlie Don’t ole Deafie keep it up? Sets up a kmd of a ’umming inside of ’im, 
’e says 

daddy When I was a boy we didn’t live on this ’ere bread and marg and tea 
and suchlike trash Good solid tommy we ’ad in them days Beefstoo Black 
pudden Bacon dumpling Pig’s ’ead Fed like a fighting-cock on a tanner a 



3 50 A Clergyman' s Daughter 

day And now fifty year I’ve ’ad of it on the toby Spud-grabbing, pea- 
pickmg, lambing, turnip-toppmg-everythink And sleeping m wet straw 
and not once in a year you don’t fill your guts right full Well-! [Retires 
mthvn his coat ] 

mrs mcelligot But he was real bold, Michael was He’d go m anywhere 
Many’s de time we’ve broke into an empty house an’ kipped m de best bed 
‘Other people got homes,’ he’d say ‘Why shouln’t we have’m too*’ 
ginger [singing] But I’m dan-cing with tears-m my eyes- 
mr tallboys [ to himself] Absumet haeres Caecuba digmor 1 To think that there 
were twenty-one bottles of Clos St Jacques 1911m my cellar still, that night 
when the baby was born and I left for London on the milk train! 
mrs wayne And as for the wreaths we ’as sent us when our mother died- well, 
you wouldn’t believe' ’Uge, they was 
mrs Bendigo If I’ad my time over again I’d marry for bloody money 
ginger [singing] 

But I’m dan-cing with tears-in my eyes- 
’Cos the girl-m my arms-isn’t you-o-ou' 
nosy watson Some of you lot think you got a bloody lot to howl about, don’t 
you? What about a poor sod like me? You wasn’t narked into the stir when 
you was eighteen year old, was you? 
the kike OhJ e-e-eeeze' 

Charlie Ginger, you can’t smg no more’n a perishing tomcat with the guts- 
ache Just you listen to me I’ll give y’a treat [Singing] Jesu, lover of my 
soul- 

mr tallboys [to himself] Et ego in Crockford With Bishops and 

Archbishops and with all the Company of Heaven 
nosy watson D’you know how I got m the stir the first time? Narked by my 
own sister-yes, my own bloody sister' My sister’s a cow if ever there was 
one She got married to a religious maniac-he’s so bloody religious that 
she’s got fifteen kids now-well, it was him put her up to narking me But I 
got back on ’em, I can tell you First thing, I done when I come out of the 
stir, I buys a hammer and goes round to my sister’s house, and smashed her 
piano to bloody matchwood ‘There 1 ’ I says, ‘that’s what you get for narking 
me' You nosing mare ' 5 1 says 

dorothy This cold, this cold! I don’t know whether my feet are there or not 
mrs mcelligot Bloody tea don’t warm you for long, do it? I’m fair froze 
myself, 

mr tallboys [to himself] My curate days, my curate days' My fancy work 
bazaars and morris-dancers in aid of on the village green, my lectures to the 
Mothers’ Union-missionary work in Western China with fourteen magic 
lantern slides' My Boys’ Cricket Club, teetotallers only, my Confirmation 
classes -purity lecture once monthly in the Parish Hall-my Boy Scout 
orgies' The Wolf Cubs will deliver the Grand Howl Household Hints for 
the Parish Magazine, ‘Discarded fountain-pen fillers can be used as enemas 
for canaries ’ 

Charlie [singing] Jesu, lover of my soul- 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 351 

GINGER ’Ere comes the bleeding flattie' Get up off the ground, all of you 
[Daddy emerges from his overcoat ] 

the policeman [shaking the sleepers on the next bench ] Now then, wake up, 
wake up' Rouse up, you' Got to go home if you want to sleep This isn’t a 
common lodging house Get up, there' [etc , etc ] 
mrs Bendigo It’s that nosy young sod as wants promotion Wouldn’t let you 
bloody breathe if ’e ’ad ’is way 
charlie [ singing ] 

Jesu, lover of my soul, 

' Let me to Thy bosom fly- 

the policeman Now then, you' What you think this is? Baptist prayer 
meeting? [To the Kike ] Up you get, and look sharp about it' 
charlie I can’t ’elp it, sergeant It’s my toonful nature It comes out of me 
natural-like 

the policeman [shaking Mrs Bendigo ] Wake up, mother, wake up' 
mrs Bendigo Mother? Mother , is it? Well, if I am a mother, thank God I ain’t 
got a bloody son like you' And I’ll tell you another little secret, constable 
Next time I want a man’s fat ’ands feeling round the back of my neck, I 
won’t ask you to do it I’ll ’ave someone with a bit more sex-appeal 
the policeman Now then, now then' No call to get abusive, you know We got 
our orders to carry out [Exit majestically ] 
snouter [sotto voce] — off, you — son of a — 1 
CHARLIE [singing] 

While the gathering waters roll. 

While the tempest still is ’igh> 

Sung bass m the choir my last two years in Dartmoor, I did 
mrs Bendigo I’ll bloody mother ’im' [Shouting after the policeman] ’I' Why 
don’t you get after them bloody cat burglars ’stead of coming nosing round a 
respectable married woman? 

ginger Kip down, blokes ’E’s jacked, [Daddy retires within his coat ] 
nosy watson Wassit like m Dartmoor now? D’they give you jam now? 
mrs wayne Of course, you can see as they couldn’t reely allow people to sleep 
m the streets-I mean, it wouldn’t be qmte mce-and then you’ve got to 
remember as it’d be encouraging of all the people as haven’t got homes of 
their own-the kind of riff-raff, if you take my meaning 
mr tallboys [to himself] Happy days, happy days! Outings with the Girl 
Guides m Epping Forest-hired brake and sleek roan horses, and I on the 
box m my grey flannel suit, speckled straw hat, and discreet layman’s neck- 
tie Buns and ginger pop under the green elms Twenty Girl Guides pious 
yet susceptible frisking in the breast-high bracken, and I a happy curate 
sporting among them, in loco parentis pinching the girls’ backsides 
mrs mcelligot Well, you may talk about kippm’ down, but begod dere won’t 
be much sleep for my poor ole bloody bones tonight I can’t skipper it now 
de way me and Michael used to. 
charlie Not jam Gets cheese, though, twice a week 
the kike Oh Jeezi I can’t stand it no longer I going down to the M A.B 



3$2 A Clergyman's Daughter 

[Dorothy stands up, and then , her knees having stiffened with the cold, almost 
falls ] 

ginger Only send you to the bleeding Labour Home What you say we all go 
up to Covent Garden tomorrow morning? Bum a few pears if we get there 
early enough 

Charlie I’ve ’ad my perishing bellyful of Dartmoor, b’lieve me Forty on us 
went through ’ell for getting off with the ole women down on the allotments 
Ole trots seventy years old they was-spud-grabbers Didn’t we cop it just 1 
Bread and water, chained to the wall-penshmg near murdered us 
mrs bendigo No fear 1 Not while my bloody husband’s there One black eye m 
a week’s enough for me, thank you 

mr tallboys [chanting, reminiscently] As for our harps, we hanged them up, 
upon the willow trees of Babylon' 

mrs mcelligot Hold up, kiddie' Stamp your feet an’ get de blood back into 
’m I’ll take y’a walk up to Paul’s m a coupla minutes 
deafie [singing] With my willy willy- 
[Big Ben strikes eleven ] 
snouter Six more — hours' Cnpes' 

[An hour passes Big Ben stops striking The mist thins and the cold increases 
A grubby-faced moon is seen sneaking among the clouds of the southern 
sky A dozen hardened old men remain on the benches, and still contrive to 
sleep, doubled up and hidden in their greatcoats Occasionally they groan in 
their sleep The others set out m all directions , intending to walk all night and 
so keep then blood flowing, but nearly all of them have drifted back to the 
Square by midnight A new policeman comes on duty He strolls through the 
Square at intervals of half an hour, scrutinizing the faces of the sleepers but 
letting them alone when he has made sure that they are only asleep and not 
dead Round each bench revolves a knot of people who take it in turns to sit 
down and are driven to their feet by the cold after a few minutes Ginger and 
Charlie fill two drums at the fountains and set out m the desperate hope of 
boiling some tea over the navvies' clinker fire in Chandos Street, but a 
policeman is warming himself at the fire, and orders them away The Kike 
suddenly vanishes, probably to beg a bed at the M A B Towards one o'clock a 
rumour goes round that a lady is distributing hot coffee, ham sandwiches, and 
packets of cigarettes under Charing Cross Bridge, there is a rush to the spot, 
but the rumour turns out to be unfounded As the Square fills again the 
ceaseless changing of places upon the benches quickens until it is a game of 
musical chairs Sitting down, with one's hands under one's armpits, it is 
possible to get into a kind of sleep, or doze, for two or three minutes on end In 
this state, enormous ages seem to pass One sinks into a complex, troubling 
dreams which leave one conscious of one's surroundings and of the bitter cold 
The night is growing clearer and colder every minute There is a chorus of 
varying sound— groans, curses, bursts of laughter, and singing , and through 
them all the uncontrollable chattering of teeth ] 
mr tallboys [chanting] I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of 
joint' 



A Clergyman's Daughter 353 

mrs mcelligot Ellen an’ me bm wanderin’ round de City dis two hours 
Begod it’s like a bloody tomb wid dem great lamps glarin’ down on you an’ 
not a soul stirren’ excep’ de flatties strollin’ two an’ two 
snouter Five past — one and I ain’t ’ad a bite since dinner 1 Course it ’ad to 
’appen to us on a — night like this 1 

mr tallboys A drinking night I should have called it But every man to his 
taste [ Chanting ] ‘My strength is dried like a potsherd, and my tongue 
cleaveth to my gums 1 ’ 

Charlie Say, what you think? Nosy and me done a smash jest now Nosy sees a 
tobacconist’s show-case full of them fancy boxes of Gold Flake, and ’e says, 
‘By cnpes I’m gomg to ’ave some of them fags if they give me a perishing 
stretch for it 1 ’ ’e says So ’e wraps ’is scarf round ’is ’and, and we waits till 
there’s a perishing great van passing as’ll drown the noise, and then Nosy 
lets fly-biff We nipped a dozen packets of fags, and then I bet you didn’t see 
our a — s for dust And when we gets round the corner and opens them, there 
wasn’t no perishing fags inside 1 Perishmg dummy boxes I ’ad to laugh 
Dorothy My knees are giving way I can’t stand up much longer 
mrs Bendigo Oh, the sod, the sod 1 To turn a woman out of doors on a night 
like bloody this! You wait’ll I get ’im drunk 0’ Saturday night and ’e can’t ’it 
back I’ll mash ’im to bloody shin of beef, I will ’E’ll look like two pennorth 
of pieces after I’ve swiped ’im with the bloody flat-iron 
mrs mcelligot Here, make room’n let de kid sit down- Press up agen ole 
Daddy, dear. Put his arm round you He’s chatty, but he’ll keep you warm 
ginger [double marking time ] Stamp your feet on the ground-only bleeding 
thing to do Strike up a song, someone, and less all stamp our bleeding feet m 
time to it 

daddy [ waking and emerging ] Wassat? [Still half asleep, he lets his head fall 
back, with mouth open and Adam's apple protruding from his withered throat 
like the blade of a tomahawk .] 

MRS Bendigo There’s women what if they’d stood what I've stood, they’d ave 
put spirits of salts m ’is cup of bloody tea 
mr tallboys [beating an imaginary drum and singing] Onward, heathen 
so-oldiers- 

mrs wayne Well, reely now 1 If any of us’d ever of thought, m the dear old days 
when we used to sit round our own Silkstone coal fire, with the kettle on the 
hob and a nice dish of toasted crumpets from the baker’s over the way 
[The chattering of her teeth silences her ] 
charlie. No perishing church trap now, matie I’ll give y’a bit of 
smut-something as we can perishing dance to You listen t’me 
mrs mcelligot Don’t you get talkin’ about crumpets, Missis Me bloody 
belly’s rubbm’ agen me backbone already 

[Charlie draws himself up, clears his throat, and in an enormous voice roars 
out a song entitled Rollicking Bill the Sailor 3 . A laugh that is partly a 
shudder bursts from the people on, the bench They smg the song through ogam* 
with increasing volume of noise, stamping and clapping m time Those sitting 
down, packed elbow to elbow, sweep grotesquely foam side to side, working their 



354 A Clergyman's Daughter 

feet as though stamping on the pedals of a harmonium Even Mrs Wayne joins 
in after a moment, laughing in spite of herself They are all laughing, though 
with chattering teeth Mr Tallboys marches up and down behind his vast swag 
belly, pretending to carry a banner or crozier m front of him The night is now 
quite clear, and an icy wind comes shuddering at intervals through the 
Square The stamping and clapping rise to a kind of frenzy as the people feel 
the deadly cold penetrate to their bones Then the policeman is seen wandering 
into the Square from the eastern end, and the singing ceases abruptly ] 
Charlie There 1 You can’t say as a bit of music don’t warm you up 
mrs bendigo This bloody wind 1 And I ain’t even got any drawers on, the 
bastard kicked me out in such a ’urry 

mrs mcelligot Well, glory be to Jesus, ’twon’t be long before dat dere church 
in de Gray’s Inn Road opens up for de winter Dey gives you a roof over 
your head of a night, ’t any rate 

the policeman Now then, now then ' D’you think this is the time of night to 
begin singing like a blooming bear garden? I shall have to send you back to 
your homes if you can’t keep quiet 
snouter [sotto voce ] You — son of a — 1 

ginger Yes-they lets you kip on the bleeding stone floor with three 
newspaper posters ’stead of blankets Might as well be in the Square and 
’ave done with it God, I wish I was in the bleeding spike 
mrs mcelligot Still, you gets a cup of Horlicks an’ two slices I bin glad to kip 
dere often enough 

mr tallboys [ chanting ] I was glad when they said unto me, We will go into the 
house of the Lord* 

dorothy [starting up] Oh, this cold, this cold' I don’t know whether it’s worse 
when you’re sittmg down or when you’re standing up Oh, how can you all 
stand it? Surely you don’t have to do this every night of your lives? 
mrs wayne You mustn’t think, dearie, as there isn’t some of us wasn’t brought 
up respectable 

Charlie [singing] Cheer up, cully, you’ll soon be dead' Brrh 1 Perishing Jesus' 
Ain’t my fish-hooks blue' [Double marks time and beats his arms against his 
sides ] 

dorothy Oh, but how can you stand it? How can you go on like this, night 
after mght, year after year? It’s not possible that people can live so' It’s so 
absurd that one wouldn’t believe it if one didn’t know it was true It’s 
impossible' 

snouter — possible if you ask me 

MR tallboys [stage curate-wise]' With God, all things are possible 
[Dorothy sinks back on to the bench, her knees still being unsteady ] 
Charlie. Well, it’s jest on ’ar-parse one Either we got to get moving, or else 
make a pyramid on that perishing bench Unless we want to perishing turn 
up our toes ’Oo’s for a little constitootional up to the Tower of London? 
mrs mcelligot ’Twon’t be me dat’ll walk another step tomght Me bloody 
legs’ve given out on me. 

ginger: What-o for the pyramid' This is a bit too bleeding nme-day-old for 



A Clergyman's Daughter 355 

me Less scrum into that bench-beg pardon, Ma ! 
daddy [sleepily] Wassa game’ Can’t a man get a bit of kip but what you must 
come worriting ’im and shaking of ’im’ 
charlie That’s the stuff 1 Shove in' Shift yourself. Daddy, and make room for 
my little sit-me-down Get one atop of each other That’s right Nevermind 
the chats Jam all together like pilchards m a perishing tin 
mrs wayne Here 1 1 didn’t ask you to sit on my lap, young man' 
ginger Sit on mine, then, mother- ’sail the same What-o 1 First bit of stuff 
I’ve ’ad my arm round since Easter 

[They pile themselves m a monstrous shapeless clot , men and women clinging 
indiscriminately together , like a bunch of toads at spawning time There is a 
writhing movement as the heap settles down , and a sour stench of clothes 
diffuses itself Only Mr Tallboys remains marching up and down ] 
mr tallboys [declaiming] O ye nights and days, ye light and darkness, ye 
lightnings and clouds, curse ye the Lord 1 

[. Deafie , someone having sat on his diaphragm , utters a strange , 
unreproducible sound ] 

mrs Bendigo Get off my bad leg, can’t you’ What you think I am’ Bloody 
drawing-room sofa’ 

charlie Don’t ole Daddy stink when you get up agen ’im’ 
ginger Bleeding Bank ’oliday for the chats this’ll be 
DOROTHY Oh, God, God' 

MR tallboys [halting] Why call on God, you puling deathbed penitent’ Stick 
to your guns and call on the Devil as I do Hail to thee, Lucifer, Prince of the 
Air 1 [Singing to the tune of ( Holy, holy holy *J Incubi and Succubi, falling 
down before Theei 

mrs Bendigo Oh, shut up, you blarsphemous old sod 1 ’E’s too bloody fat to 
feel the cold, that’s what’s wrong with ’im 
charlie Nice soft be’md you got, Ma Keep an eye out for the penshmg 
flattie. Ginger 

MR tallboys Malecidite 3 omnia opera 1 The Black Mass 1 Why not’ Once a 
priest always a priest Hand me a chunk of toke and I will work the miracle 
Sulphur candles. Lord’s Prayer backwards, crucifix upside down [To 
Dorothy] If we had a black he-goat you would come in useful 

[ The animal heat of the piled bodies had already made itself felt A drowsiness 
is descending upon everyone ] 

mrs wayne You mustn’t think as I’m accustomed to sittmg on a gentleman’s 
knee, you know 

mrs mcelligot [drowsily] . It took my sacraments reg’lar till de bloody priest 
wouldn’t give me absolution along 0’ my Michael, De ole get, de ole 
getsie 1 

mr tallboys [striking an attitude] Per aquam sacratam quam nunc spargo , 
signumque crucis quod nunc facto 

ginger ’Oo’s got a fill of ’ard-up’ I’ve smoked by last bleeding fag-end, 

MR tallboys [as at the altar]. Dearly beloved brethren we are gathered 
together m the sight of God for the solemnization of unholy blasphemy. He 



556 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

has afflicted us with dirt and cold, with hunger and solitude, with the pox 
and the itch, with the headlouse and the crablouse Our food is damp crusts 
and slimy meat-scraps handed out m packets from hotel doorways Our 
pleasure is stewed tea and sawdust cakes bolted m reeking cellars, bar- 
rinsing sand spittle of common ale, the embrace of toothless hags Our 
destiny is the pauper’s grave, twenty-feet deep in deal coffins, the kip-house 
of underground It is very meet, right and our bounden duty at all times and 
in all places to curse Him and revile Him Therefore with Demons and 
Archdemons [etc , etc , etc ] 

mrs mcelligot [drowsily] By holy Jesus, I’m half asleep right now, only some 
b — ’s lyin’ across my legs and crushin’ ’em 
mr tallboys Amen Evil from us deliver, but temptation into not us lead [etc , 
etc , etc ] 

[As he reaches the first word of the prayer he tears the consecrated bread 
across The blood runs out of it There is a rolling sound , as of thunder , and the 
landscape changes Dorothy’s feet are very cold Monstrous winged shapes of 
Demons and Archdemons are dimly visible , moving to and fro Something , 
beak or claw , closes upon Dorothy’s shoulder, reminding her that her feet and 
hands are aching with cold ] 

the policeman [shaking Dorothy by the shoulder ] Wake up, now, wake up, 
wake up 1 Haven’t you got an overcoat? You’re as white as death Don’t 
you know better than to let yourself sprawl about m the cold like that? 
[Dorothy finds that she is stiff with cold The sky is now quite clear, with 
gritty little stars twinkling like electric lamps enormously remote The 
pyramid has unrolled itself ] 

mrs mcelligot De poor kid, she ain’t used to roughin’ it de way us others are 
ginger [beating his arms ] Brr ! Woo* ’Taters in the bleeding mould* 
mrs wayne She’s a lady bom and bred 

the policeman Is that so?-See here. Miss, you best come down to the M A B 
with me They’ll give you a bed all right Anyone can see with half an eye as 
you’re a cut above these others here 

mrs bfndigo Thank you, constable, thank you* ’Ear that, girls? ‘A cut above 
us,’ ’e says Nice, ain’t it? [To the policeman j Proper bloody Ascot swell 
yourself, ain’t you? 

Dorothy No, no* Leave me. I’d rather stay here 

the policeman Well, please yourself You looked real bad just now I’ll be 
along later and take a look at you [Moves off doubtfully ] 

Charlie Wait’ll the perisher’s round the corner and then pile up agen Only 
perishing way we’ll keep warm 

mrs mcelligot Come on, kid Get underneath an’ let’m warm you 
snouter Ten mmutes to — two Can’t last for ever, I s’pose 
MR tallboys [chanting]: I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of 
joint My heart also in the midst of my body is like unto melting wax* 

[Once more the people pile themselves on the bench But the temperature is 
now not many degrees above freezing-point, and the wind is blowing more 
cuttingly. The people wriggle their zmnd-mpped faces into the heap like 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 357 

sucking pigs struggling for their mother’s teats One’s interludes of sleep shrink 
to a few seconds, and one’s dreams grow more monstrous, troubling , and 
undreamlike There are times when the nine people are talking almost 
normally , times when they can even laugh at their situation, and times when 
they press themselves together in a kind of frenzy, with deep groans of pain 
Mi Tallboys suddenly becomes exhausted and his monologue degenerates into 
a stream of nonsense He drops his vast bulk on top of the others, almost 
suffocating them The heap rolls apart Some remain on the bench, some slide 
to the ground and collapse against the parapet or against the others’ knees 
The policeman enters the Square and orders those on the ground to their feet 
They get up, and collapse again the moment he is gone There is no sound from 
the ten people save of snores that are partly groans Their heads nod like those 
of joined porcelain Chinamen as they fall asleep and reawake as rhythmically 
as the ticking of a clock Three strikes somewhere A voice yells like a trumpet 
from the eastern end of the Square ‘Boys 1 Up you get 1 The noospapers is 
come’’] 

Charlie [starting from his sleep ] The perishing papers’ C’m on. Ginger' Run 
like Hell' 

[They run, or shamble, as fast as they can to the corner of the Square , where 
three youths are distributing surplus posters given away m charity by the 
morning newspapers Charlie and Ginger come back with a thick wad of 
posters The five largest men now jam themselves together on the bench , Deafie 
and the four women sitting across their knees, then, with infinite difficulty ( as 
it has to be done from the inside), they wrap themselves m a monstrous cocoon 
of paper, several sheets thick, tucking the loose ends into their necks or breasts 
or between their shoulders and the back of the bench Finally nothing is 
uncovered save their heads and the lower part of their legs For their heads 
they fashion hoods of paper The paper constantly comes loose and lets in cold 
shafts of wind, but it is now possible to sleep for as much as five minutes 
consecutively At this time-between three and five m the mormng~it is 
customary with the police not to disturb the Square sleepers A measure of 
warmth steals through everyone and extends even to their feet There is some 
furtive fondling of the women under cover of the paper Dorothy is too far gone 
to care 

By a quarter past four the paper is all crumpled and torn to nothing, and it is 
far too cold to remain sitting down The people get up, swear, find their legs 
somewhat rested, and begin to slouch to and fro m couples, frequently halting 
from mere lassitude Every belly is now contorted with hunger Ginger’s tin of 
condensed milk is tom open and the contents devoured, everyone dipping their 
fingers into it and licking them. Those who have no money at all leave the 
Square for the Green Park, where they will be undisturbed till seven . Those 
who can command even a halfpenny make for Wilkins’s cafe not far from the 
Charing Cross Road It is known that the cafe will not open till five o’clock; 
nevertheless , a crowd is waiting outside the door by twenty to five ] 

mrs mcelligot Got your halfpenny, dearie-* Dey won’t let more’n four of us 
in on one cup o’tea, de stingy ole gets' 



3 $8 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

mr tallboys [singing] The roseate hu-ues of early da-awn— 
ginger God, that bit of sleep we ’ad under the newspapers done me some 
good [Singing] But I’m dan-cmg with tears-m my eyes- 
charlie Oh, boys, boys' Look through that perishing window, will you’ Look 
at the ’eat steaming down the window pane' Look at the tea-urns jest on the 
boil, and them great piles of ’ot toast and ’am sandwiches, and them there 
sausages sizzling m the pan' Don’t it make your belly turn perishing 
summersaults to see ’em’ 

Dorothy I’ve got a penny I can’t get a cup of tea for that, can I’ 
snouter — lot of sausages we’ll get this morning with fourpence between us 
’Alf a cup of tea and a — doughnut more likely There’s a breakfus’ for you' 
mrs mcelligot You don’t need buy a cup o’ tea all to yourself I got a 
halfpenny an’ so’s Daddy, an’ we’ll put’m to your penny an’ have a cup 
between de t’ree of us He’s got sores on his lip, but Hell' who cares’ Drink 
near de handle an’ dere’s no harm done 
[A quarter to five strikes ] 

mrs bendigo I’d bet a dollar my ole man’s got a bit of ’addock to ’is breakfast I 
’ope it bloody chokes ’im 

ginger [singing] But I’m dan-cing with tears-m my eyes- 
mr tallboys [singing] Early m the morning my song shall rise to Thee! 
mrs mcelligot You gets a bit o’ kip m dis place, dat’s one comfort Dey lets 
you sleep wid your head on de table till seven o’clock It’s a bloody godsend 
to us Square Tobies 

Charlie [slavering like a dog] Sausages' Perishing sausages' Welsh rabbit! ’Ot 
dripping toast' And a rump-steak two inches thick with chips and a pint of 
Ole Burton' Oh, perishing Jesus' 

[He bounds forward, pushes his way through the crowd and rattles the handle 
of the glass door The whole crowd of people, about forty strong, surge forward 
and attempt to storm the door, which is stoutly held within by Mr Wilkins, the 
proprietor of the cafe He menaces them through the glass. Some press their 
breasts and faces against the window as though warming themselves With a 
whoop and a rush Florry and four other girls , comparatively fresh from 
having spent part of the night m bed, debouch from a neighbouring alley, 
accompanied by a gang of youths m blue suits They hurl themselves upon the 
rear of the crowd with such momentum that the door is almost broken Mr 
Wilkins pulls it furiously open and shoves the leaders back A fume of 
sausages, kippers , coffee, and hot bread streams into the outer cold ] 
youths’ voices from the rear Why can’t he — open before five’ We’re 
starving for our — tea' Ram the — door in' [etc , etc ] 
mr wilkins Get out' Get out, the lot of you' Or by God not one of you comes 
m this morning' 

girls’ voices from the rear Mis-ter Wil-kins' Mis-ter Wil-kms' Be a sport 
and let us ini I’ll give y’a kiss all free for nothing Be a sport now* [etc , etc ] 
mr wilkins Get on out of it' We don’t open before five, and you know it 
[Slams the door,] 

mrs mcelligot Oh, holy Jesus, if dis ain’t de longest ten minutes o’ de whole 



A Clergyman's Daughter 359 

bloody night’ Well, I’ll give me poor ole legs a rest, anyway [Squats on her 
heels coal-mtner-fashion Many others do the same ] 
ginger ’Oo’s got a ’alfpenny? I’m ripe to go fifty-fifty on a doughnut 
youths’ voices [imitating military music , then singing] 

‘ — ’’ was all the band could play, 

‘ — ' — ’ And the same to you’ 

dorothy [to Mrs McElligot ] Look at us all’ Just look at us' What clothes’ 
What faces' 

mrs Bendigo You’re no Greta Garbo yourself, if you don’t mind my 
mentiomng it 

mrs wayne Well, now, the time do seem to pass slowly when you’re waiting for 
a nice cup of tea, don’t it now? 

mr tallboys [chanting] For our soul is brought low, even unto the dust our 
belly cleaveth unto the ground’ 

Charlie Kippers' Perishing piles of ’em’ I can smell ’em through the 
perishing glass 
ginger [singing] 

But I’m dan-cmg with tears-m my eyes- 
’Cos the girl-m my arms-isn’t you-o-ou’ 

[Much time passes Five strikes Intolerable ages seem to pass Then the door 
is suddenly wrenched open and the people stampede m to fight for the corner 
seats Almost swooning m the hot air , they fling themselves down and sprawl 
across the tables, drinking m the heat and the smell of food through all their 
pores ] 

mr wilkins Now then, all’ You know the rules, I s’pose No hokey-pokey this 
morning' Sleep till seven if you like, but if I see any man asleep after that, 
out he goes on his neck Get busy with that tea, girls' 
a deafening chorus of yells Two teas ’ere' Large tea and a doughnut 
between us four' Kippers' Mis-ter Wil-kms' ’Ow much them sausages? 
Two slices' Mis-ter Wil-kins' Got any fag papers? Kipp -erf [etc , etc ] 
mr wilkins Shut up, shut up! Stop that hollering or I don’t serve any of you 
mrs mcelligot D’you fell de blood runmn’ back mto your toes, dearie? 
mrs wayne He do speak rough to you, don’t he? Not what I’d call a reely 
gentlemanly kind of man 

snouter This is — starvation Corner, this is Cripes' Couldn’t I do a couple 
of them sausages' 

the tarts [in chorus] Kippers ’ere' ’Urry up with them kippers' Mis-ter Wil- 
kins' Kippers all round' And a doughnut' 
charlie Not ’alf ' Got to fill up on the smell of ’em this morning Sooner be 
’ere than on the perishing Square, all the same 
ginger ’Ere, Deafie' You’ve ’ad your ’alf Gimme me that bleeding cup 
mr tallboys [chanting]' Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our 
tongue with joy! 

mrs mcelligot Begod I’m half asleep already It’s de heat o’ de room as does 
it 

mr WILKINS’ Stop that singing there' You know the rules. 



g6o A Clergyman’s Daughter 

the tarts [ in chorus] Kipp-m’ 

snouter — doughnuts’ Cold prog' It turns my belly sick 
daddy Even the tea they give you ain’t no more than water with a bit of dust in 
it [ Belches ] 

charlie Bes’ thing- ’ave a bit of shut-eye and forget about it Dream about 
perishing cut off the joint and two veg Less get our ’eads on the table and 
pack up comfortable 

mrs mcelligot Lean up agen me shoulder, dearie I’ve got more flesh on me 
bones’n what you have 

ginger I’d give a tanner for a bleeding fag, if I ’ad a bleeding tanner 
charlie Pack up Get your ’ead agenst mine, Snouter That’s right Jesus, 
won’t I perishing sleep’ 

[A dish of smoking kippers is borne past to the tarts 3 table ] 
snouter [drowsily] More — kippers Wonder ’ow many times she’s bin on ’er 
back to pay for that lot 

mrs mcelligot [half-asleep] ’Twas a pity, ’twas a real pity, when Michael 
went off on his jack an’ left me wid de bloody baby an’ all 
mrs bendigo [furiously , following the dish of kippers with accusing finger ] Look 
at that, girls’ Look at that’ Kippers' Don’t it make you bloody wild^ We 
don’t get kippers for breakfast, do we, girls ? Bloody tarts swallermg down 
kippers as fast as they can turn ’em out of the pan, and us ’ere with a cup of 
tea between four of us and lucky to get that’ Kippers’ 

MR Tallboys [stage curate-wise ] The wages of sin is kippers 
ginger Don’t breathe in my face, Deafie I can’t bleeding stand it 
charlie [in his sleep ] Charles- Wisdom-drunk-and-mcapable-drunk^-yes-six- 
shillings-move-on-wexi' 

dorothy [on Mrs McElligot’s bosom] Oh, joy, joy’ 

[They are asleep ] 


2 


And so it goes on 

Dorothy endured this life for ten days-to be exact, nine days and ten nights 
It was hard to see what else she could do Her father, seemingly, had 
abandoned her altogether, and though she had friends in London who would 
readily have helped her, she did not feel that she could face them after what 
had happened, or what was supposed to have happened And she dared not 
apply to organized charity because it would almost certainly lead to the 
discovery of her name, and hence, perhaps, to a fresh hullabaloo about the 
‘Rector’s Daughter’ 

So she stayed m London, and became one of that curious tribe, rare but 



A Clergyman's Daughter 36 1 

never quite extinct-the tribe of women who are penniless and homeless, but 
who make such desperate efforts to hide it that they very nearly succeed, 
women who wash their faces at drinking fountains m the cold of the dawn, and 
carefully uncrumple their clothes after sleepless nights, and carry themselves 
with an air of reserve and decency, so that only their faces, pale beneath 
sunburn, tell you for certain that they are destitute It was not m her to become 
a hardened beggar like most of the people about her Her first twenty-four 
hours on the Square she spent without any food whatever, except for the cup of 
tea that she had had overnight and a third of a cup more that she had had at 
Wilkins’s caffe m the morning But in the evening, made desperate by hunger 
and the others’ example, she walked up to a strange woman, mastered her voice 
with an effort, and said ‘Please, Madam, could you give me twopence^ I have 
had nothing to eat smce yesterday ’ The woman stared, but she opened her 
purse and gave Dorothy threepence Dorothy did not know it, but her 
educated accent, which had made it impossible to get work as a servant, was an 
invaluable asset to her as a beggar 

After that she found that it was really very easy to beg the daily shilling or so 
that was needed to keep her alive And yet she never begged~it seemed to her 
that actually she could not do lt-except when hunger was past bearing or when 
she had got to lay m the precious penny that was the passport to Wilkins’s caffe 
m the morning With Nobby, on the way to the hopfields, she had begged 
without fear or scruple But it had been different then; she had not known what 
she was doing Now, it was only under the spur of actual hunger that she could 
screw her courage to the point, and ask for a few coppers from some woman 
whose face looked friendly It was always women that she begged from, of 
course She did once try begging from a man-but only once 

For the rest, she grew used to the life that she was leading-used to the 
enormous sleepless nights, the cold, the dirt, the boredom, and the horrible 
communism of the Square After a day or two she had ceased to feel even a 
flicker of surprise at her situation. She had come, like everyone about her, to 
accept this monstrous existence almost as though it were normal The dazed, 
witless feeling that she had known on the way to the hopfields had come back 
upon her more strongly than before It is the common effect of sleeplessness 
and still more of exposure To live continuously in the open air, never going 
under a roof for more than an hour or two, blurs your perceptions like a strong 
light glaring in your eyes or a noise drumming in your ears. You act and plan 
and suffer, and yet all the while it is as though everything were a little out of 
focus, a little unreal The world, inner and outer, grows dimmer till it reaches 
almost the vagueness of a dream 

Meanwhile, the police were getting to know her by sight On the Square 
people are perpetually coming and going, more or less unnoticed They arrive 
from nowhere with their drums and their bundles, camp for a few days and 
nights, and then disappear as mysteriously as they come If you stay for more 
than a week or thereabouts, the police will mark you down as an habitual 
beggar, and* they will arrest you sooner or later It is impossible for them to 
enforce th©' begging laws at all regularly, but from time to time they make a 



362 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

sudden raid and capture two or three of the people they have had their eye on 
And so it happened in Dorothy’s case 
One evening she was ‘knocked off’, in company with Mrs McElligot and 
another woman whose name she did not know They had been careless and 
begged off a nasty old lady with a face like a horse, who had promptly walked 
up to the nearest policeman and given them in charge 
Dorothy did not mind very much Everything was dreamlike now- the face 
of the nasty old lady, eagerly accusing them, and the walk to the station with a 
young policeman’s gentle, almost deferential hand on her arm, and then the 
white-tiled cell, with the fatherly sergeant handing her a cup of tea through the 
grille and telling her that the magistrate wouldn’t be too hard on her if she 
pleaded guilty In the cell next door Mrs McElligot stormed at the sergeant, 
called him a bloody get, and then spent half the night in bewailing her fate But 
Dorothy had no feeling save vague relief at being m so clean and warm a place 
She crept immediately on to the plank bed that was fixed like a shelf to the wall, 
too tired even to pull the blankets about her, and slept for ten hours without 
stirring It was only on the following morning that she began to grasp the 
reality of her situation, as the Black Maria rolled briskly up to Old Street 
Police Court, to the tune of ‘Adeste fideles’ shouted by five drunks inside 


CHAPTER 4 

I 


Dorothy had wronged her father in supposing that he was willing to let her 
starve to death in the street He had, as a matter of fact, made efforts to get m 
touch with her, though in a roundabout and not very helpful way 

His first emotion on learning of Dorothy’s disappearance had been rage pure 
and simple At about eight in the morning, when he was beginning to wonder 
what had become of his shaving water, Ellen had come into his bedroom and 
announced in a vaguely panic-stricken tone 
‘Please, Sir, Miss Dorothy ain’t m the house, Sir I can’t find her nowhere 1 ’ 
‘What >! said the Rector 

‘She ain’t in the house. Sir 1 And her bed don’t look as if it hadn’t been slept 
m, neither It’s my belief as she’s gorn, Sir 1 ’ 

‘Gone 1 ’ exclaimed the Rector, partly sitting up in bed ‘What do you 
mean-gone^’ 

‘Well, Sir, I believe she’s run away from ’ome, Sir!’ 

■ ‘Run away from home' At this hour of the mornmg> And what about my 
breakfast, pray>’ 

By the time the Rector got downstairs-unshaven, no hot water having 
appeared— Ellen had gone down into the town to make fruitless inquiries for 
Dorothy, An hour passed, and she did not return Whereupon there occurred a 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 36 3 

frightful, unprecedented thing-a thing never to be forgotten this side of the 
grave, the Rector was obliged to prepare his own breakfast-yes, actually to 
mess about with a vulgar black kettle and rashers of Danish bacon-with his 
own sacerdotal hands 

After that, of course, his heart was hardened against Dorothy for ever For 
the rest of the day he was far too busy raging over unpunctual meals to ask 
himself why she had disappeared and whether any harm had befallen her The 
point was that the confounded girl (he said several times ’confounded girl’, and 
came near to saying something stronger) had disappeared, and had upset the 
whole household by doing so Next day, however, the question became more 
urgent, because Mrs Sempnll was now publishing the story of the elopement 
far and wide Of course, the Rector demed it violently, but in his heart he had a 
sneaking suspicion that it might be true It was the kind of thing, he now 
decided, that Dorothy would do A girl who would suddenly walk out of the 
house without even taking thought for her father’s breakfast was capable of 
anything 

Two days later the newspapers got hold of the story, and a nosy young 
reporter came down to Knype Hill and began asking questions The Rector 
made matters worse by angrily refusing to interview the reporter, so that Mrs 
Sempnll’s version was the only one that got into print For about a week, until 
the papers got tired of Dorothy’s case and dropped her m favour of a 
plesiosaurus that had been seen at the mouth of the Thames, the Rector 
enjoyed a horrible notoriety He could hardly open a newspaper without 
seeing some flaming headline about ‘Rector’s Daughter Further Revelations’, 
or ‘Rector’s Daughter Is she in Vienna^ Reported seen in Low-class Cabaret’ 
Finally there came an article m the Sunday Spyhole , which began, ‘Down m a 
Suffolk Rectory a broken old man sits staring at the wall’, and which was so 
absolutely unbearable that the Rector consulted his solicitor about an action 
for libel However, the solicitor was against it; it might lead to a verdict, he 
said, but it would certainly lead to further publicity So the Rector did 
nothing, and his anger against Dorothy, who had brought this disgrace upon 
him, hardened beyond possibility of forgiveness 

After this there came three letters from Dorothy, explaining what had 
happened Of course the Rector never really believed that Dorothy had lost her 
memory It was too thin a story altogether He believed that she either had 
eloped with Mr Warburton, or had gone off on some similar escapade and had 
landed herself penniless in Kent, at any rate-this he had settled once and for 
all, and no argument would ever move him from lt-whatever had happened to 
her was entirely her own fault The first letter he wrote was not to Dorothy 
herself but to his cousin Tom, the baronet. For a man of the Rector’s 
upbringing it was second nature, in any serious trouble, to turn to a rich 
relative for help. He had not exchanged a word with his cousin for the last 
fifteen years, since they had' quarrelled over a little matter of a borrowed fifty 
pounds; still, he wrote fairly confidently,' asking Sir Thomas to get m touch 
with Dorothy if it could be done; and to find her some kind of job m London 
For of course, after What had happened* there could be no question of letting 



364 A Clergyman 3 s Daughter 

her come back to Knype Hill 

Shortly after this there came two despairing letters from Dorothy, telling 
him that she was m danger of starvation and imploring him to send her some 
money The Rector was disturbed It occurred to him-it was the first time m 
his life that he had seriously considered such a thing-that it is possible to 
starve if you have no money So, after thinking it over for the best part of a 
week, he sold out ten pounds’ worth of shares and sent a cheque for ten pounds 
to his cousin, to be kept for Dorothy till she appeared At the same time he sent 
a cold letter to Dorothy herself, telling her that she had better apply to Sir 
Thomas Hare But several more days passed before this letter was posted, 
because the Rector had qualms about addressing a letter to ‘Ellen 
Millborough’-he dimly imagined that it was against the law to use false 
names-and, of course, he had delayed far too long Dorothy was already m the 
streets when the letter reached ‘Mary’s’ 

Sir Thomas Hare was a widower, a good-hearted, chuckle-headed man of 
about sixty-five, with an obtuse rosy face and curling moustaches He dressed 
by preference in checked overcoats and curly brimmed bowler hats that were 
at once dashingly smart and four decades out of date At a first glance he gave 
the impression of having carefully disguised himself as a cavalry major of the 
’nineties, so that you could hardly look at him without thinking of devilled 
bones with a b and s, and the tinkle of hansom bells, and the Pink ’Un in its 
great ‘Pitcher’ days, and Lottie Collins and ‘Tarara-BOOM-deay’ But his chief 
characteristic was an abysmal mental vagueness He was one of those people 
who say ‘Don’t you know 5 ’ and ‘What 1 What 1 ’ and lose themselves m the 
middle of their sentences When he was puzzled or in difficulties, his 
moustaches seemed to bristle forward, giving him the appearance of a well- 
meaning but exceptionally brainless prawn 

So far as his own inclinations went Sir Thomas was not m the least anxious 
to help his cousins, for Dorothy herself he had never seen, and the Rector he 
looked on as a cadging poor relation of the worst possible type But the fact was 
that he had had just about as much of this ‘Rector’s Daughter’ business as he 
could stand The accursed chance that Dorothy’s surname was the same as his 
own had made his life a misery for the past fortnight, and he foresaw further 
and worse scandals if she were left at large any longer So, just before leaving 
London for the pheasant shooting, he sent for his butler, who was also his 
confidant and intellectual guide, and held a council of war 
‘Look here, Blyth, dammit,’ said Sir Thomas prawnishly (Blyth was the 
butler’s name), ‘I suppose you’ve seen all this damn’ stuff in the newspapers, 
hey? This “Rector’s Daughter” stuff? About this damned niece of mine ’ 
Blyth was a small sharp-featured man with a voice that never rose above a 
whisper It was as nearly silent as a voice can be while still remaining a voice 
Only by watching his bps as well as listening closely could you catch the whole 
of what he said In this case his lips signalled something to the effect that 
Dorothy was Sir Thomas’s cousin, not his mece 
‘What, my cousin, is she?’ said Sir Thomas ‘So she is, by Jove 1 Well, look 
here, Blyth, what I mean to say-it’s about time we got hold of the damn’ girl 



A Clergyman' s Daughter 36$ 

and locked her up somewhere See what I mean? Get hold of her before there’s 
any more trouble She’s knocking about somewhere m London, I believe 
What’s the best way of getting on her track? Police? Private detectives and all 
that? D’you think we could manage it?’ 

Blyth’s lips registered disapproval It would, he seemed to be saying, be 
possible to trace Dorothy without calling m the police and having a lot of 
disagreeable publicity 

‘Good man*’ said Sir Thomas ‘ Get to it, then Never mind what it costs I’d 
give fifty quid not to have that “Rector’s Daughter” business over again And 
for God’s sake, Blyth,’ he added confidentially, ‘once you’ve got hold of the 
damn’ girl, don’t let her out of your sight Bring her back to the house and 
damn’ well keep her here See what I mean? Keep her under lock and key till I 
get back Or else God knows what she’ll be up to next ’ 

Sir Thomas, of course, had never seen Dorothy, and it was therefore 
excusable that he should have formed his conception of her from the 
newspaper reports 

It took Blyth about a week to track Dorothy down On the morning after she 
came out of the police-court cells (they had fined her six shillings, and, m 
default of payment, detained her for twelve hours Mrs McElligot, as an old 
offender, got seven days), Blyth came up to her, lifted his bowler hat a quarter 
of an inch from his head, and inquired noiselessly whether she were not Miss 
Dorothy Hare At the second attempt Dorothy understood what he was 
saying, and admitted that she was Miss Dorothy Hare, whereupon Blyth 
explained that he was sent by her cousm, who was anxious to help her, and that 
she was to come home with him immediately 
Dorothy followed him without more words said It seemed queer that her 
cousm should take this sudden interest m her, but it was no queerer than the 
other things that had been happening lately They took the bus to Hyde Park 
Corner, Blyth paying the fares, and then walked to a large, expensive-looking 
house with shuttered windows, on the borderland between Kmghtsbridge and 
Mayfair They went down some steps, and Blyth produced a key and they went 
in So, after an absence of something over six weeks, Dorothy returned to 
respectable society, by the area door 

She spent three days in the empty house before her cousin came home It 
was a queer, lonely time There were several servants in the house, but she saw 
nobody except Blyth, who brought her her meals and talked to her, noiselessly, 
with a mixture of deference and disapproval He could not quite make up his 
mmd whether she was a young lady of family or a rescued Magdalen, and so 
treated her as something between the two The house had that hushed, corpse- 
like air peculiar to houses whose master is away, so that you instinctively went 
about on tiptoe and kept the blmds over the windows. Dorothy did not even 
dare to enter any of the mam rooms She spent all the daytime lurking m a 
dusty, forlorn room at the top of the house which was a sort of museum of bric- 
a-brac dating from 1880 onwards. Lady Hare, dead these five years, had been 
an industrious collector of rubbishf, and most of it had been stowed away m this 
room when she died. It was a doubtful point whether the queerest object in the 



$ 66 A Clergyman's Daughter 

room was a yellowed photograph of Dorothy’s father, aged eighteen but with 
respectable side-whiskers, standing self-consciously beside an ‘ordinary’ 
bicycle-this was m 1888, or whether it was a little sandalwood box labelled 
‘Piece of Bread touched by Cecil Rhodes at the City and South Africa 
Banquet, June 1897’ The sole books m the room were some grisly school 
prizes that had been won by Sir Thomas’s children-he had three, the youngest 
being the same age as Dorothy 

It was obvious that the servants had orders not to let her go out of doors 
However, her father’s cheque for ten pounds had arrived, and with some 
difficulty she induced Blyth to get it cashed, and, on the third day, went out 
and bought herself some clothes She bought herself a ready-made tweed coat 
and skirt and a jersey to go with them, a hat, and a very cheap frock of artificial 
printed silk, also a pair of passable brown shoes, three pairs of lisle stockings, a 
nasty, cheap little handbag, and a pair of grey cotton gloves that would pass for 
suCde at a little distance That came to eight pounds ten, and she dared not 
spend more As for underclothes, nightdresses, and handkerchiefs, they would 
have to wait After all, it is the clothes that show that matter 

Sir Thomas arrived on the following day, and never really got over the 
surprise that Dorothy’s appearance gave him He had been expecting to see 
some rouged and powdered siren who would plague him with temptations to 
which alas* he was no longer capable of succumbing, and this countrified, 
spinsterish girl upset all his calculations Certain vague ideas that had been 
floating about his mind, of finding her a job as a manicurist or perhaps as a 
private secretary to a bookie, floated out of it agam From time to time Dorothy 
caught him studying her with a puzzled, prawmsh eye, obviously wondering 
how on earth such a girl could ever have figured in an elopement It was very 
little use, of course, telling him that she had not eloped She had given him her 
version of the story, and he had accepted it with a chivalrous ‘Of course, 
m’dear, of course 1 ’ and thereafter, m every other sentence, betrayed the fact 
that he disbelieved her 

So for a couple of days nothmg definite was done Dorothy continued her 
solitary life in the room upstairs, and Sir Thomas went to his club for most of 
his meals, and in the evening there were discussions of the most unutterable 
vagueness Sir Thomas was genuinely anxious to find Dorothy a job, but he 
had great difficulty m remembering what he was talking about for more than a 
few minutes at a time ‘Well, m’dear,’ he would start off, ‘you’ll understand, of 
course, that I’m very keen to do what I can for you Naturally, bemg your 
uncle and all that-what? What’s that? Not your uncle? No, I suppose I’m not, 
by Jove 1 Cousm-that’s it, cousin. Well, now, m’dear, being your cousin-now, 
what was I saying’’ Then, when Dorothy had guided him back to the subject, 
he would throw out some such suggestion as, ‘Well, now, for instance, m’dear, 
how would you like to be companion to an old lady? Some dear old girl, don’t 
yqu know-black mittens and rheumatoid arthritis. Die and leave you ten 
thousand quid and care of the parrot What, what?’ which did not get them 
very much further Dorothy repeated a number of times that she would rather 
be a housemaid or a parlourmaid* but Sir Thomas would not hear of it. The 



A Clergyman's Daughter 367 

very idea awakened in him a class-instinct which he was usually too vague- 
mmded to remember ‘What 1 ’ he would say ‘A dashed skivvy? Girl of your 
upbringing? No, m’dear-no, no 1 Can’t do that kind of thing, dash nT 

But m the end everything was arranged, and with surprising ease, not by Sir 
Thomas, who was incapable oftarrangmg anything, but by his solicitor, whom 
he had suddenly thought of consulting And the solicitor, without even seeing 
Dorothy, was able to suggest a job for her She could, he said, almost certainly 
find a job as a schoolmistress Of all jobs, that was the easiest to get 

Sir Thomas came home very pleased with this suggestion, which struck him 
as highly suitable (Privately, he thought that Dorothy had just the kind of face 
that a schoolmistress ought to have ) But Dorothy was momentarily aghast 
when she heard of it 

‘A schoolmistress 1 ’ she said ‘But I couldn’t possibly 1 I’m sure no school 
would give me a job There isn’t a single subject I can teach ’ 

‘What? What’s that? Can’t teach? Oh, dash it 1 Of course you can 1 Where’s 
the difficulty?’ 

‘But I don’t know enough 1 I’ve never taught anybody anything, except 
cooking to the Girl Guides You have to be properly qualified to be a teacher ’ 
‘Oh, nonsensei Teaching’s the easiest job m the world Good thick 
ruler-rap ’em over the knuckles They’ll be glad enough to get hold of a 
decently brought up young woman to teach the youngsters their abc That’s 
the line for you, m’ dear-schoolmistress You’re just cut out for it ’ 

And sure enough, a schoolmistress Dorothy became The invisible solicitor 
had made all the arrangements in less than three days It appeared that a 
certain Mrs Creevy, who kept a girls’ day school m the suburb of Southbndge, 
was m need of an assistant, and was quite willing to give Dorothy the job How 
it had all been settled so quickly, and what kind of school it could be that would 
take on a total stranger, and unqualified at that, in the middle of the term, 
Dorothy could hardly imagine She did not know, of course, that a bribe of five 
pounds, miscalled a premium, had changed hands 

So, just ten days after her arrest for begging, Dorothy set out for Ringwood 
House Academy, Brough Road, Southbndge, with a small trunk decently full 
of clothes and four pounds ten in her purse-for Sir Thomas had made her a 
present of ten pounds When she thought of the ease with which this job had 
been found for her, and then of the miserable struggles of three weeks ago, the 
contrast amazed her It brought home to her, as never before, the mysterious 
power of money In fact, it remmded her of a favourite saying of Mr 
Warburton’s, that if you took 1 Corinthians, chapter thirteen, and in every 
verse wrote ‘money’ instead of ‘charity’, the chapter had ten times as much 
meaning as before 



2 


Southbndge was a repellent suburb ten or a dozen miles from London 
Brough Road lay somewhere at the heart of it, amid labyrinths of meanly 
decent streets, all so mdistinguishably alike, with their ranks of semi-detached 
houses, their privet and laurel hedges and plots of ailing shrubs at the 
crossroads, that you could lose yourself there almost as easily as m a Brazilian 
forest Not only the houses themselves, but even their names were the same 
over and over again Readmg the names on the gates as you came up Brough 
Road, you were conscious of being haunted by some half-remembered passage 
of poetry, and when you paused to identify it, you realized that it was the first 
two lines of Lycidas 

Rmgwood House was a dark-looking, semi-detached house of yellow brick, 
three storeys high, and its lower windows were hidden from the road by ragged 
and dusty laurels Above the laurels, on the front of the house, was a board 
inscribed in faded gold letters 

RINGWOOD HOUSE ACADEMY FOR GIRLS 

Ages 5 to 1 8 

Music and Dancing Taught 
Apply within for Prospectus 

Edge to edge with this board, on the other half of the house, was another 
board which read 


RUSHINGTON GRANGE HIGH SCHOOL FOR BOYS 
Ages 6 to 1 6 

Book-keeping and Commercial Arithmetic a Speciality 
Apply within for Prospectus 

The district pullulated with small private schools, there were four of them in 
Brough Road alone Mrs Creevy, the Principal of Rmgwood House, and Mr 
Boulger, the Principal of Rushington Grange, were in a state of warfare, 
though their interests m no way clashed with one another Nobody knew what 
the feud was about, not even Mrs Creevy or Mr Boulger themselves, it was a 
feud that they had inherited from earlier proprietors of the two schools In the 
mormngs after breakfast they would stalk up and down their respective back 
gardens, beside the very low wall that separated them, pretending not to see 
one another and grinning with hatred, 

Dorothy’s heart sank at the sight of Rmgwood House She had not been 
expecting anything very magnificent or attractive, but she had expected 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 36 9 

something a little better than this mean, gloomy house, not one of whose 
windows was lighted, though it was after 8 o’clock m the evening She knocked 
at the door, and it was opened by a woman, tall and gaunt-lookmg m the dark 
hallway, whom Dorothy took for a servant, but who was actually Mrs Creevy 
herself Without a word, except to inquire Dorothy’s name, the woman led the 
way up some dark stairs to a twilit, fireless drawing-room, where she turned up 
a pinpoint of gas, revealing a black piano, stuffed horsehair chairs, and a few 
yellowed, ghostly photos on the walls 
Mrs Creevy was a woman somewhere in her forties, lean, hard, and angular, 
with abrupt decided movements that indicated a strong will and probably a 
vicious temper Though she was not m the least dirty or untidy there was 
something discoloured about her whole appearance, as though she lived all her 
life in a bad light, and the expression of her mouth, sullen and ill-shaped with 
the lower lip turned down, recalled that of a toad She spoke in a sharp, 
commanding voice, with a bad accent and occasional vulgar turns of speech 
You could tell her at a glance for a person who knew exactly what she wanted, 
and would grasp it as ruthlessly as any machine, not a bully exactly-you could 
somehow infer from her appearance that she would not take enough interest in 
you to want to bully you— but a person who would make use of you and then 
throw you aside with no more compunction than if you had been a worn-out 
scrubbing-brush 

Mrs Creevy did not waste any words on greetings She motioned Dorothy to 
a chair, with the air rather of commanding than of inviting her to sit down, and 
then sat down herself, with her hands clasped on her skinny forearms 

‘I hope you and me are gomg to get on well together. Miss Millborough,’ she 
began m her penetrating, subhectoring voice (On the advice of Sir Thomas’s 
everwise solicitor, Dorothy had stuck to the name of Ellen Millborough ) ‘And 
I hope I’m not going to have the same nasty business with you as I had with my 
last two assistants You say you haven’t had an experience of teaching before 
this^’ 

‘Not in a school,’ said Dorothy-there had been a tarradiddle in her letter of 
introduction, to the effect that she had had experience of ‘private teaching’ 
Mrs Creevy looked Dorothy over as though wondering whether to induct 
her into the inner secrets of school-teaching, and then appeared to decide 
against it 

‘Well, we shall see,’ she said, ‘I must say,’ she added complainmgly, ‘it’s not 
easy to get hold of good hardworking assistants nowadays You give them good 
wages and good treatment, and you get no thanks for it The last one I had-the 
one I’ve just had to get rid of-Miss Strong, wasn’t so bad so far as the teaching 
part went, intact* she was a B A , and I don’t know what you could have better 
than aB A , unless it’s an M A You don’t happen to be a B A, or an M A., do 
you, Miss Millborough?’ 

‘No, I’m afraid not,’ said 4 Dorothy ' • • u * 

‘Well, that’s a pity It looks so much-better on the prospectus- if you’re gota 
few letters after your name. ^elllTerhaps it doesn’t matter, I don’t suppose 
many of our parents’d know wfeatB Aj.stands for, and aren’t 80 Oh 



3 jo A Clergyman's Daughter 

showing their ignorance I suppose you can talk French, of course?’ 
‘Well-I’ve learnt French * 

‘Oh, that’s all right, then Just so as we can put it on the prospectus Well, 
now, to come back to what I was saying, Miss Strong was all right as a teacher, 
but she didn’t come up to my ideas on what I call the moral side We’re very 
strong on the moral side at Ringwood House It’s what counts most with the 
parents, you’ll find And the one before Miss Strong, Miss Brewer- well, she 
had what I call a weak nature You don’t get on with girls if you’ve got a weak 
nature The end of it all was that one morning one little girl crept up to the desk 
with a box of matches and set fire to Miss Brewer’s skirt Of course I wasn’t 
going to keep her after that In fact I had her out of the house the same 
afternoon-and I didn’t give her any refs either, I can tell you 1 ’ 

‘You mean you expelled the girl who did it?’ said Dorothy, mystified 
‘What? The girP Not likely 1 You don’t suppose I’d go and turn fees away 
from my door, do you? I mean I got rid of Miss Brewer, not the girl It’s no 
good having teachers who let the girls get saucy with them We’ve got twenty- 
one in the class just at present, and you’ll find they need a strong hand to keep 
them down ’ 

‘You don’t teach yourself?’ said Dorothy 

‘Oh dear, no 1 ’ said Mrs Creevy almost contemptuously ‘I’ve got a lot too 
much on my hands to waste my time teaching There’s the house to look after, 
and seven of the children stay to dinner- I’ve only a daily woman at present 
Besides, it takes me all my time getting the fees out of the parents After all, the 
fees are what matter, aren’t they?’ 

‘Yes I suppose so,’ said Dorothy 

‘Well, we’d better settle about your wages,’ continued Mrs Creevy ‘In term 
time I’ll give you your board and lodging and ten shillings a week, in the 
holidays it’ll just be your board and lodging You can have the use of the 
copper m the kitchen for your laundering, and I light the geyser for hot baths 
every Saturday night, or at least most Saturday nights. You can’t have the use 
of this room we’re in now, because it’s my reception-room, and I don’t want 
you to go wasting the gas m your bedroom But you can have the use of the 
mormng-room whenever you want it ’ 

‘Thank you,’ said Dorothy 

‘Well, I should think that’ll be about all I expect you’re feeling ready for 
bed You’ll have had your supper long ago, of course?’ 

This was clearly intended to mean that Dorothy was not going to get any 
food tonight, so she answered Yes, untruthfully, and the conversation was at 
an end That was always Mrs Creevy’ s way- she never kept you talking an 
instant longer than was necessary Her conversation was so very definite, so 
exactly to the point, that it was not really conversation at all Rather, it was the 
skeleton of conversation, like the dialogue m a badly written novel where 
everyone talks a little too much in character But indeed, m the proper sense of 
the word she did not talk, she merely said, in her brief shrewish way, whatever 
it was necessary to say* and then got rid of you as promptly as possible She 
now showed Dorothy along the passage to her bedroom, and lighted a gas-jot 



A Clergyman’s Daughter gji 

no bigger than an acorn, revealing a gaunt bedroom with a narrow white- 
quilted bed, a rickety wardrobe, one chair and a wash-hand-stand with a frigid 
white china basin and ewer It was very like the bedrooms in seaside lodging 
houses, but it lacked the one thing that gives such rooms their air of homeliness 
and decency-the text over the bed 

‘This is your room/ Mrs Creevy said, ‘and I just hope you’ll keep it a bit 
tidier than what Miss Strong used to And don’t go burning the gas half the 
night, please, because I can tell what time you turn it off by the crack under the 
door ’ 

With this parting salutation she left Dorothy to herself The room was 
dismally cold, indeed, the whole house had a damp, chilly feeling, as though 
fires were rarely lighted in it Dorothy got into bed as quickly as possible, 
feeling bed to be the warmest place On top of the wardrobe, when she was 
putting her clothes away, she found a cardboard box containing no less than 
nine empty whisky bottles-relics, presumably, of Miss Strong’s weakness on 
the moral side 

At eight in the morning Dorothy went downstairs and found Mrs Creevy 
already at breakfast in what she called the ‘morning-room’ This was a smallish 
room adjoining the kitchen, and it had started life as the scullery; but Mrs 
Creevy had converted it into the ‘morning-room’ by the simple process of 
removing the sink and copper into the kitchen The breakfast table, covered 
with a cloth of harsh texture, was very large and forbiddingly bare Up at Mrs 
Creevy’ s end were a tray with a very small teapot and two cups, a plate on 
which were two leathery fried eggs, and a dish of marmalade, in the middle, 
just within Dorothy’s reach if she stretched, was a plate of bread and butter, 
and beside her plate-as though it were the only thing she could be trusted 
with-a cruet stand with some dried-up, clotted stuff inside the bottles 
‘Good morning. Miss Millborough,’ said Mrs Creevy ‘It doesn’t matter 
this morning, as this is the first day, but just remember another time that I 
want you down here in time to help me get breakfast ready ’ 

‘I’m so sorry,’ said Dorothy 

‘I hope you’re fond of fried eggs for your breakfast^’ went on Mrs Creevy 
Dorothy hastened to assure her that she was very fond of fried eggs 
‘Well, that’s a good thing, because you’ll always have to have the same as 
what I have So I hope you’re not going to be what I call dainty about your 
food I always think,’ she added, picking up her knife and fork, ‘that a fried egg 
tastes a lot better if you cut it well up before you eat it ’ 

She sliced the two eggs into thin strips, and then served them in such a way 
that Dorothy received about two-thirds of an egg With some difficulty 
Dorothy spun out her fraction of egg so as to make half a dozen mouthfuls of it, 
and then, when she had taken a slice of bread and butter, she could not help 
glancing hopefully in the direction of the dish of marmalade. But Mrs Creevy 
was sitting with her lean left arm-not exactly round the marmalade, but in a 
protective position on its' left flank, as though she suspected that Dorothy was 
going to make an attack upon it Dorothy’s nerve failed her, and she had no 
marmalade that mornmg-nor, indeed, for many mornings to come 



3j2 A Clergyman's Daughter 

Mrs Creevy did not speak again during breakfast, but presently the sound of 
feet on the gravel outside, and of squeaky voices m the schoolroom, announced 
that the girls were beginning to arrive They came m by a side-door that was 
left open for them Mrs Creevy got up from the table and banged the breakfast 
things together on the tray She was one of those women who can never move 
anything without banging it about, she was as full of thumps and raps as a 
poltergeist Dorothy carried the tray into the kitchen, and when she returned 
Mrs Creevy produced a penny notebook from a drawer m the dresser and laid 
it open on the table 

‘Just take a look at this,’ she said ‘Here’s a list of the girls’ names that I’ve 
got ready for you I shall want you to know the whole lot of them by this 
evemng ’ She wetted her thumb and turned over three pages ‘Now, do you see 
these three lists here?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Dorothy 

‘Well, you’ll just have to learn those three lists by heart, and make sure you 
know what girls are on which Because I don’t want you to go thinking that all 
the girls are to be treated alike They aren’t- not by a long way, they aren’t 
Different girls, different treatment-that’s my system Now, do you see this lot 
on the first page?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Dorothy agam 

‘Well, the parents of that lot are what I call the good payers You know what I 
mean by that? They’re the ones that pay cash on the nail and no jibbing at an 
extra half-guinea or so now and again You’re not to smack any of that lot, not 
on any account This lot over here are the medium payers Their parents do pay 
up sooner or later, but you don’t get the money out of them without you worry 
them for it night and day You can smack that lot if they get saucy, but don’t go 
and leave a mark their parents can see If you’ll take my advice, the best thing 
with children is to twist their ears Have you ever tried that?’ 

‘No,’ said Dorothy 

‘Well, I find it answers better than anything It doesn’t leave a mark, and the 
children can’t bear it Now these three over here are the bad payers Their 
fathers are two terms behind already, and I’m thinking of a solicitor’s letter I 
don’t care what you do to that lot-well, short of a police-court case, naturally 
Now, shall I take you m and start you with the girls? You’d better bring that 
book along with you, and just keep your eye on it all the time so as there’ll be no 
mistakes ’ 

They went mto the schoolroom It was a largish room, with grey-papered 
walls that were made yet greyer by the dullness of the light, for the heavy laurel 
bushes outside choked the windows, and no direct ray of the sun ever 
penetrated into the room There was a teacher’s desk by the empty fireplace, 
and there were a dozen small double desks, a light blackboard, and, on the 
mantelpiece, a black clock that looked like a miniature mausoleum, but there 
were no maps, no pictures, nor even, as far as Dorothy could see, any books 
The sole objects in the room that could be called ornamental were two sheets of 
black paper pinned to the walls, with writing on them in chalk m beautiful 
copperplate On one was ‘ Speech is Silver. Silence is Golden’, and on the other 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 57 3 

‘Punctuality is the Politeness of Princes’ 

The girls, twenty-one of them, were already sitting at their desks They had 
grown very silent when they heard footsteps approaching, and as Mrs Creevy 
came in they seemed to shrink down m their places like partridge chicks when a 
hawk is soaring For the most part they were dull-lookmg, lethargic children 
with bad complexions, and adenoids seemed to be remarkably common among 
them The eldest of them might have been fifteen years old, the youngest was 
hardly more than a baby The school had no uniform, and one or two of the 
children were verging on raggedness 

‘Stand up, girls,’ said Mrs Creevy as she reached the teacher’s desk ‘We’ll 
start off with the morning prayer ’ 

The girls stood up, clasped their hands in front of them, and shut their eyes 
They repeated the prayer in unison, m weak piping voices, Mrs Creevy leading 
them, her sharp eyes darting over them all the while to see that they were 
attending 

‘Almighty and everlasting Father,’ they piped, ‘we beseech Thee that our 
studies this day may be graced by Thy divine guidance Make us to conduct 
ourselves quietly and obediently, look down upon our school and make it to 
prosper, so that it may grow m numbers and be a good example to the 
neighbourhood and not a disgrace like some schools of which Thou knowest, 
O Lord Make us, we beseech Thee, O Lord, industrious, punctual, and 
ladylike, and worthy m all possible respects to walk in Thy ways for Jesus 
Christ’s sake, our Lord, Amen ’ 

This prayer was of Mrs Creevy’ s own composition When they had finished 
it, the girls repeated the Lord’s Prayer, and then sat down 

‘Now, girls,’ said Mrs Creevy, ‘this is your new teacher. Miss Millborough 
As you know. Miss Strong had to leave us all of a sudden after she was taken so 
bad in the middle of the arithmetic lesson, and I can tell you I’ve had a hard 
week of it looking for a new teacher I had seventy-three applications before I 
took on Miss Millborough, and I had to refuse them all because their 
qualifications weren’t high enough Just you remember and tell your parents 
that, all of you-seventy-three applications' Well, Miss Millborough is gomg 
to take you m Latin, French, history, geography, mathematics, English 
literature and composition, spelling, grammar, handwriting, and freehand 
drawing, and Mr Booth will take you m chemistry as usual on Thursday 
afternoons Now, what’s the first lesson on your time-table this morning?’ 

‘History, Ma’am,’ piped one or two voices 

‘Very well I expect Miss Millborough’ll start off by asking you a few 
questions about the history you’ve been learning So just you do your best, all 
of you, and let her see that all the trouble we’ve taken over you hasn’t been 
wasted You’ll find they can be quite a sharp lot of girls when they try, Miss 
Millborough ’ 

‘I’m sure they are, 9 said Dorothy. 

‘Well, I’ll be leaving you, then And just you behave yourselves, girls' Don’t 
you get trying it on with Miss Millborough like you did with Miss Brewer, 
because I warn you she won’t stand it If I hear any noise coming from this 



374 A Clergyman's Daughter 

room, there’ll be trouble for somebody 5 

She gave a glance round which included Dorothy and indeed suggested that 
Dorothy would probably be the ‘somebody’ referred to, and departed 
Dorothy faced the class She was not afraid of them-she was too used to 
dealing with children ever to be afraid of them-but she did feel a momentary 
qualm The sense of being an impostor (what teacher has not felt it at times*) 
was heavy upon her It suddenly occurred to her, what she had only been 
dimly aware of before, that she had taken this teaching job under flagrantly 
false pretences, without having any kind of qualification for it The subject she 
was now supposed to be teaching was history, and, like most ‘educated’ people, 
she knew virtually no history How awful, she thought, if it turned out that 
these girls knew more history than she did 1 She said tentatively 
‘What period exactly were you doing with Miss Strong*’ 

Nobody answered Dorothy saw the older girls exchanging glances, as 
though asking one another whether it was safe to say anything, and finally 
deciding not to commit themselves 

‘Well, whereabouts had you got to*’ she said, wondering whether perhaps 
the word ‘period’ was too much for them 
Again no answer 

‘Well, now, surely you remember something about it* Tell me the names of 
some of the people you were learning about m your last history lesson ’ 

More glances were exchanged, and a very plain little girl in the front row, m 
a brown jumper and skirt, with her hair screwed into two tight pigtails, 
remarked cloudily, ‘It was about the Ancient Britons ’ At this two other girls 
took courage, and answered simultaneously One of them said, ‘Columbus’, 
and the other ‘Napoleon’ 

Somehow, after that, Dorothy seemed to see her way more clearly It was 
obvious that instead of being uncomfortably knowledgeable as she had feared, 
the class knew as nearly as possible no history at all With this discovery her 
stage-fright vanished She grasped that before she could do anything else with 
them it was necessary to find out what, if anything, these children knew So, 
instead of following the time-table, she spent the rest of the morning m 
questioning the entire class on each subject m turn, when she had finished with 
history (and it took about five minutes to get to the bottom of their historical 
knowledge) she tried them with geography, with English grammar, with 
French, with anthmetic-with everything, m fact, that they were supposed to 
have learned By twelve o’clock she had plumbed, though not actually 
explored, the frightful abysses of their ignorance 
For they knew nothing, absolutely nothing-nothing, nothing, nothing, like 
the Dadaists It was appalling that even children could be so ignorant. There 
were only two girls in the class who knew whether the earth went round the 
sun or the sun round the earth, and not a single one of them could tell Dorothy 
who was the last king before George V, or who wrote Hamlet , or what was 
meant by a vulgar fraction, or which ocean you crossed to get to America, the 
Atlantic or the Pacific And the big girls of fifteen were not much better than 
the tiny infants of eight, except that the former could at least read 



A Clergyman's Daughter 375 

consecutively and write neat copperplate That was the one thing that nearly 
all of the older girls could do-they could write neatly Mrs Creevy had seen to 
that And of course, here and there in the midst of their ignorance, there were 
small, disconnected islets of knowledge, for example, some odd stanzas from 
‘pieces of poetry’ that they had learned by heart, and a few Ollendorffian 
French sentences such as c . Passez-moi le beurre , sM vous plait ’ and ( Lefils du 
jar dimer a perdu son chapeau* 3 which they appeared to have learned as a parrot 
learns ‘Pretty Poll’ As for their arithmetic, it was a little better than the other 
subjects Most of them knew how to add and subtract, about half of them had 
some notion of how to multiply, and there were even three or four who had 
struggled as far as long division But that was the utmost limit of their 
knowledge, and beyond, in every direction, lay utter, impenetrable night 

Moreover, not only did they know nothing, but they were so unused to 
being questioned that it was often difficult to get answers out of them at all It 
was obvious that whatever they knew they had learned m an entirely 
mechanical manner, and they could only gape m a sort of dull bewilderment 
when asked to think for themselves However, they did not seem unwilling, 
and evidently they had made up their minds to be ‘good’ -children are always 
‘good’ with a new teacher, and Dorothy persisted, and by degrees the children 
grew, or seemed to grow, a shade less lumpish She began to pick up, from the 
answers they gave her, a fairly accurate notion of what Miss Strong’s rdgime 
had been like 

It appeared that, though theoretically they had learned all the usual school 
subjects, the only ones that had been at all seriously taught were handwriting 
and arithmetic Mrs Creevy was particularly keen on handwriting And 
besides this they had spent great quantities of time-an hour or two out of every 
day, it seemed-m drudging through a dreadul routine called ‘copies ’ ‘Copies’ 
meant copying things out of textbooks or off the blackboard Miss Strong 
would write up, for example, some sententious little ‘essay’ (there was an essay 
entitled ‘Spring’ which recurred m all the older girls’ books, and which began, 
‘Now, when girlish April is tripping through the land, when the birds are 
chanting gaily on the boughs and the dainty flowerets bursting from their 
buds’, etc , etc ), and the girls would make fair copies of it in their copybooks, 
and the parents, to whom the copybooks were shown from time to time, were 
no doubt suitably impressed Dorothy began to grasp that everything that the 
girls had been taught was in reality aimed at the parents Hence the ‘copies’, 
the insistence on handwriting, and the parroting of ready-made French 
phrases, they were cheap and easy ways of creating an impression Meanwhile, 
the little girls at the bottom of the class seemed barely able to read and write, 
and one of them-her name was Mavis Williams, and she was a rather sinister- 
looking child of eleven, with eyes too far apart-could not even count This 
child seemed to have done nothing at all during the past term and a half except 
to write pothooks She had quite a pile of books filled with pothooks-page 
after page of pothooks, looping on and on like the mangrove roots in some 
tropical swamp 

Dorothy tried not to hurt the children’s feelings by exclaiming at their 



3j6 A Clergyman’ s Daughter 

ignorance, but in her heart she was amazed and horrified She had not known 
that schools of this description still existed m the civilized world The whole 
atmosphere of the place was so curiously antiquated-so reminiscent of those 
dreary little private schools that you read about in Victorian novels As for the 
few textbooks that the class possessed, you could hardly look at them without 
feeling as though you had stepped back into the mid nineteenth century There 
were only three textbooks of which each child had a copy One was a shilling 
arithmetic, pre Great War but fairly serviceable, and another was a horrid little 
book called The Hundred Page History of Britain -a nasty little duodecimo 
book with a gritty brown cover, and, for frontispiece, a portrait of Boadicea 
with a Umon Jack draped over the front of her chariot Dorothy opened this 
book at random, came to page 91, and read 


After the French Revolution was over, the self-styled Emperor Napoleon Buonaparte 
attempted to set up his sway, but though he won a few victories against continental troops, he soon 
found that in. the ‘thm red line’ he had more than met his match Conclusions were tried upon the 
field of Waterloo, where 50,000 Britons put to flight 70,000 Frenchmen— for the Prussians, our 
allies, arrived too late for the battle With a ringing British cheer our men charged down the slope 
and the enemy broke and fled We now come on to the great Reform Bill of 1 832, the first of those 
beneficent reforms which have made British liberty what it is and marked us off from the less 
fortunate nations [etc , etc ] 


The date of the book was 1888 Dorothy, who had never seen a history book 
of this description before, examined it with a feeling approaching horror 
There was also an extraordinary little ‘reader’, dated 1863 It consisted mostly 
of bits out of Fenimore Cooper, Dr Watts, and Lord T ennyson, and at the end 
there were the queerest little ‘Nature Notes’ with woodcut illustrations There 
would be a woodcut of an elephant, and underneath m small print ‘The 
elephant is a sagacious beast He rejoices m the shade of the Palm Trees, and 
though stronger than six horses he will allow a little child to lead him His food 
is Bananas ’ And so on to the Whale, the Zebra, and Porcupine, and the 
Spotted Camelopard There were also, in the teacher’s desk, a copy of 
Beautiful Joe 3 a forlorn book called Peeps at Distant Lands } and a French 
phrase-book dated 1891. It was called All you will need on your Parisian Trip , 
and the first phrase given was ‘Lace my stays, but not too tightly’ In the whole 
room there was not such a thing as an atlas or a set of geometrical instruments 
At eleven there was a break of ten minutes, and some of the girls played dull 
little games at noughts and crosses or quarrelled over pencil-cases, and a few 
who had got over their first shyness clustered round Dorothy’s desk and talked 
to her They told her some more about Miss Strong and her methods of 
teachings and how she used to twist their ears when they made blots on their 
copybooks It appeared that Miss Strong had been a very strict teacher except 
when she was ‘taken bad’, which happened about twice a week And when she 
was taken bad she used to drink some medicine out of a little brown bottle, and 
after drinking it she would grow quite jolly for a while and talk to them about 
hex brother in Canada But on her last day- the time when she was taken so bad 
during the arithmetic lesson-the medicine seemed to make her worse than 



A Clergyman's Daughter 377 

ever, because she had no sooner drunk it than she began sinking and fell across 
a desk, and Mrs Creevy had to carry her out of the room 

After the break there was another period of three quarters of an hour, and 
then school ended for the morning Dorothy felt stiff and tired after three ' 
hours in the chilly but stuffy room, and she would have liked to go out of doors 
for a breath of fresh air, but Mrs Creevy had told her beforehand that she must 
come and help get dinner ready The girls who lived near the school mostly 
went home for dinner, but there were seven who had dinner in the ‘morning- 
room’ at tenpence a time It was an uncomfortable meal, and passed in almost 
complete silence, for the girls were frightened to talk under Mrs Creevy’s eye 
The dinner was stewed scrag end of mutton, and Mrs Creevy showed 
extraordinary dexterity in serving the pieces of lean to the ‘good payers’ and 
the pieces of fat to the ‘medium payers’ As for the three ‘bad payers’, they ate a 
shamefaced lunch out of paper bags m the school-room 

School began again at two o’clock Already, after only one morning’s 
teaching, Dorothy went back to her work with secret shrinking and dread She 
was beginning to realize what her life would be like, day after day and week 
after week, m that sunless room, trying to drive the rudiments of knowledge 
into unwilling brats But when she had assembled the girls and called their 
names over, one of them, a little peaky child with mouse-coloured hair, called 
Laura Firth, came up to her desk and presented her with a pathetic bunch of 
browny-yellow chrysanthemums, ‘from all of us’ The girls had taken a liking 
to Dorothy, and had subscribed fourpence among themselves, to buy her a 
bunch of flowers 

Something stirred m Dorothy’s heart as she took the ugly flowers She 
looked with more seeing eyes than before at the anaemic faces and shabby 
clothes of the children, and was all of a sudden horribly ashamed to think that 
in the morning she had looked at them with indifference, almost with dislike 
Now, a profound pity took possession of her The poor children, the poor 
children 1 How they had been stunted and maltreated' And with it all they had 
retained the childish gentleness that could make them squander their few 
pennies on flowers for their teacher. 

She felt quite differently towards her job from that moment onwards A 
feeling of loyalty and affection had sprung up in her heart This school was her 
school, she would work for it and be proud of it, and make every effort to turn it 
from a place of bondage into a place human and decent. Probably it was very 
little that she could do She was so inexperienced and unfitted for her job that 
she must educate herself before she could even begin to educate anybody else 
Still, she would do her best, she would do whatever willingness and energy 
could do to rescue these children from the horrible darkness in which they bad 
been kept. 



3 


During the next few weeks there were two things that occupied Dorothy to the 
exclusion of all others One, getting her class into some kind of order, the 
other, establishing a concordat with Mrs Creevy 
The second of the two was by a great deal the more difficult Mrs Creevy’ s 
house was as vile a house to live m as one could possibly imagine It was always 
more or less cold, there was not a comfortable chair in it from top to bottom, 
and the food was disgusting Teaching is harder work than it looks, and a 
teacher needs good food to keep him going It was horribly dispiriting to have 
to work on a diet of tasteless mutton stews, damp boiled potatoes full of little 
black eyeholes, watery rice puddings, bread and scrape, and weak tea-and 
never enough even of these Mrs Creevy, who was mean enough to take a 
pleasure m skimping even her own food, ate much the same meals as Dorothy, 
but she always had the lion’s share of them Every morning at breakfast the two 
fried eggs were sliced up and unequally partitioned, and the dish of marmalade 
remained for ever sacrosanct Dorothy grew hungrier and hungrier as the term 
went on On the two evenings a week when she managed to get out of doors she 
dipped into her dwindling store of money and bought slabs of plain chocolate, 
which she ate in the deepest secrecy-for Mrs Creevy, though she starved 
Dorothy more or less intentionally, would have been mortally offended if she 
had known that she bought food for herself 
The worst thing about Dorothy’s position was that she had no privacy and 
very little time that she could call her own Once school was over for the day 
her only refuge was the ‘morning-room’, where she was under Mrs Creevy’ s 
eye, and Mrs Creevy’s leading idea was that Dorothy must never be left m 
peace for ten minutes together She had taken it into her head, or pretended to 
do so, that Dorothy was an idle person who needed keeping up to the mark 
And so it was always, ‘Well, Miss Millborough, you don’t seem to have very 
much to do this evening, do you? Aren’t there some exercise books that want 
correcting? Or why don’t you get your needle and do a bit of sewing? I’m sure I 
couldn’t bear to just sit in my chair doing nothing like you do 1 ’ She was for ever 
finding household jobs for Dorothy to do, even making her scrub the 
schoolroom floor on Saturday mornings when the girls did not come to school, 
but this was done out of pure ill nature, for she did not trust Dorothy to do the 
work properly, and generally did it again after her One evening Dorothy was 
unwise enough to bring back a novel from the public library Mrs Creevy 
flared up at the very sight of it ‘Well, really. Miss Millborough! I shouldn’t 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 579 

have thought you’d have had time to read 1 ’ she said bitterly She herself had 
never read a book right through in her life, and was proud of it 

Moreover, even when Dorothy was not actually under her eye, Mrs Creevy 
had ways of making her presence felt She was for ever prowling in the 
neighbourhood of the schoolroom, so that Dorothy never felt quite safe from 
her intrusion, and when she thought there was too much noise she would 
suddenly rap on the wall with her broom-handle in a way that made the 
children jump and put them off their work At all hours of the day she was 
restlessly, noisily active When she was not cooking meals she was banging 
about with broom and dustpan, or harrying the charwoman, or pouncing down 
upon the schoolroom to ‘have a look round’ in hopes of catching Dorothy or 
the children up to mischief, or ‘doing a bit of gardemng’-that is, mutilating 
with a pair of shears the unhappy little shrubs that grew amid wastes of gravel 
m the back garden On only two evenings a week was Dorothy free of her, and 
that was when Mrs Creevy sallied forth on forays which she called ‘going after 
the girls’, that is to say, canvassing likely parents These evenings Dorothy 
usually spent in the public library, for when Mrs Creevy was not at home she 
expected Dorothy to keep out of the house, to save fire and gaslight On other 
evenings Mrs Creevy was busy writing dunning letters to the parents, or 
letters to the editor of the local paper, haggling over the price of a dozen 
advertisements, or poking about the girls’ desks to see that their exercise books 
had been properly corrected, or ‘doing a bit of sewing’ Whenever occupation 
failed her for even five minutes she got out her workbox and ‘did a bit of 
sewing’-generally restitchmg some bloomers of harsh white linen of which she 
had pairs beyond number They were the most chilly looking garments that 
one could possibly imagine, they seemed to carry upon them, as no nun’s coif 
or anchorite’s hair shirt could ever have done, the impress of a frozen and 
awful chastity The sight of them set you wondermg about the late Mr Creevy, 
even to the point of wondering whether he had ever existed 

Looking with an outsider’s eye at Mrs Creevy’ s manner of life, you would 
have said that she had no pleasures whatever She never did any of the things 
that ordinary people do to amuse themselves-never went to the pictures, never 
looked at a book, never ate sweets, never cooked a special dish for dinner or 
dressed herself in any kmd of finery Social life meant absolutely nothing to 
her. She had no friends, was probably incapable of imagining such a thing as 
friendship, and hardly ever exchanged a word with a fellow being except on 
business Of religious belief she had not the smallest vestige Her attitude 
towards religion, though she went to the Baptist Chapel every Sunday to 
impress the parents with her piety, was a mean anti-clericalism founded on the 
notion that the clergy are ‘only after your money’ She seemed a creature 
utterly joyless, utterly submerged by the dullness of her existence. But in 
reality it was not so There were several things from which she derived acute 
and inexhaustible pleasure. 

For instance, there was her avarice over money , It was the leading interest of 
her life There are two kinds of avaricious person— Hie belch grasping type who 
will ruin you lfhecan, but who never looks twice at, twopence^ and the petty 



380 A Clergyman's Daughter 

miser who has not the enterprise actually to make money, but who will always, 
as the saying goes, take a farthing from a dunghill with his teeth Mrs Creevy 
belonged to the second type By ceaseless canvassing and impudent bluff she 
had worked her school up to twenty-one pupils, but she would never get it 
much further, because she was too mean to spend money on the necessary 
equipment and to pay proper wages to her assistant The fees the girls paid, or 
didn’t pay, were five guineas a term with certain extras, so that, starve and 
sweat her assistant as she might, she could hardly hope to make more than a 
hundred and fifty pounds a year clear profit But she was fairly satisfied with 
that. It meant more to her to save sixpence than to earn a pound So long as she 
could think of a way of docking Dorothy’s dinner of another potato, or getting 
her exercise books a halfpenny a dozen cheaper, or shoving an unauthorized 
half guinea on to one of the ‘good payers” bills, she was happy after her 
fashion 

And again, m pure, purposeless maligmty-m petty acts of spite, even when 
there was nothing to be gained by them- she had a hobby of which she never 
weaned She was one of those people who experience a kind of spiritual orgasm 
when they manage to do somebody else a bad turn Her feud with Mr Boulger 
next door-a one-sided affair, really, for poor Mr Boulger was not up to Mrs 
Creevy’s fighting weight-was conducted ruthlessly, with no quarter given or 
expected So keen was Mrs Creevy’s pleasure in scoring off Mr Boulger that 
she was even willing to spend money on it occasionally A year ago Mr Boulger 
had written to the landlord (each of them was for ever writing to the landlord, 
complaining about the other’s behaviour), to say that Mrs Creevy’s kitchen 
chimney smoked mto his back windows, and would she please have it 
heightened two feet The very day the landlord’s letter reached her, Mrs 
Creevy called in the bricklayers and had the chimney lowered two feet It cost 
her thirty shillings, but it was worth it After that there had been the long 
guerrilla campaign of throwing things over the garden wall during the night, 
and Mrs Creevy had finally won with a dustbinful of wet ashes thrown on to 
Mr Boulger’s bed of tulips As it happened, Mrs Creevy won a neat and 
bloodless victory soon after Dorothy’s arrival Discovering by chance that the 
roots of Mr Boulger’s plum tree had grown under the wall into her own 
garden, she promptly injected a whole tm of weed-killer mto them and killed 
the tree This was remarkable as being the only occasion when Dorothy ever 
heard Mrs Creevy laugh 

But Dorothy was too busy, at first, to pay much attention to Mrs Creevy and 
her nasty characteristics She saw quite clearly that Mrs Creevy was an odious 
woman and that her own position was virtually that of a slave, but it did not 
greatly worry her Her work was too absorbing, too all-important In 
comparison with it, her own comfort and even her future hardly seemed to 
matter. 

It did not take her more than a couple of days to get her class mto running 
order It was curious, but though she had no experience of teaching and no 
preconceived theories about it, yet from the very first day she found herself, as 
though by mstinct, rearranging, scheming, innovating There was so much 



A Clergyman 3 s Daughter 381 

that was crying out to be done The first thing, obviously, was to get rid of the 
grisly routine of ‘copies’, and after Dorothy’s second day no more ‘copies’ were 
done m the class, m spite of a sniff or two from Mrs Creevy The handwriting 
lessons, also, were cut down Dorothy would have liked to do away with 
handwriting lessons altogether so far as the older girls were concerned-it 
seemed to her ridiculous that girls of fifteen should waste time m practising 
copperplate-but Mrs Creevy would not hear of it She seemed to attach an 
almost superstitious value to handwriting lessons And the next thmg, of 
course, was to scrap the repulsive Hundred Page History and the preposterous 
little ‘readers’ It would have been worse than useless to ask Mrs Creevy to buy 
new books for the children, but on her first Saturday afternoon Dorothy 
begged leave to go up to London, was grudgingly given it, and spent two 
pounds three shillings out of her precious four pounds ten on a dozen second- 
hand copies of a cheap school edition of Shakespeare, a big second-hand atlas, 
some volumes of Hans Andersen’s stories for the younger children, a set of 
geometrical instruments, and two pounds of plasticine With these, and 
history books out of the public library, she felt that she could make a start 

She had seen at a glance that what the children most needed, and what they 
had never had, was individual attention So she began by dividing them up 
into three separate classes, and so arranging things that two lots could be 
working by themselves while she ‘went through’ something with the third It 
was difficult at first, especially with the younger girls, whose attention 
wandered as soon as they were left to themselves, so that you could never really 
take your eyes off them And yet how wonderfully, how unexpectedly, nearly 
all of them improved durmg those first few weeks' For the most part they were 
not really stupid, only dazed by a dull, mechanical rigmarole For a week, 
perhaps, they continued unteachable, and then, quite suddenly, their warped 
little minds seemed to spring up and expand like daisies when you move the 
garden roller off them 

Quite quickly and easily Dorothy broke them in to the habit of thinking for 
themselves She got them to make up essays out of their own heads instead of 
copying out drivel about the birds chanting on the boughs and the flowerets 
bursting from their buds She attacked their arithmetic at the foundations and 
started the little girls on multiplication and piloted the older ones through long 
division to fractions, she even got three of them to the point where there was 
talk of starting on decimals She taught them the first rudiments of French 
grammar in place of c Passez-moi le beurre , shl vous plait' and l Lefilsdujardmier 
a perdu son chapeau ’ Finding that not a girl in the class knew what any of the 
countries of the world looked like (though several of them knew that Quito was 
the capital of Ecuador), she set them to making a large contour-map of Europe 
in plasticine, on a piece of three-ply wood, copying it in scale from the atlas 
The children adored making the map, they were always clamouring to be 
allowed to go on with it. And she started the whole class, except the six 
youngest girls and Mavis Williams, the pothook specialist, on reading 
Macbeth Not a child among them had ever voluntarily read anything m her 
life before, except perhaps the Girl's Own Paper ; but they tpok readily to 



382 A Clergyman’ s Daughter 

Shakespeare, as all children do when he is not made horrible with parsing and 
analysing 

History was the hardest thing to teach them Dorothy had not realized till 
now how hard it is for children who come from poor homes to have even a 
conception of what history means Every upper-class person, however lll- 
mformed, grows up with some notion of history, he can visualize a Roman 
centurion, a medieval knight, an eighteenth-century nobleman, the terms 
Antiquity, Middle Ages, Renaissance, Industrial Revolution evoke some 
meaning, even if a confused one, m his mind But these children came from 
bookless homes and from parents who would have laughed at the notion that 
the past has any meaning for the present They had never heard of Robin 
Hood, never played at being Cavaliers and Roundheads, never wondered who 
built the English churches or what Fid Def on a penny stands for There were 
just two historical characters of whom all of them, almost without exception, 
had heard, and those were Columbus and Napoleon Heaven knows 
why-perhaps Columbus and Napoleon get into the newspapers a little oftener 
than most historical characters They seemed to have swelled up m the 
children’s minds, like Tweedledum and Tweedledee, till they blocked out the 
whole landscape of the past Asked when motor-cars were invented, one child, 
aged ten, vaguely hazarded, ‘About a thousand years ago, by Columbus ’ 

Some of the older girls, Dorothy discovered, had been through the Hundred 
Page History as many as four times, from Boadicea to the first Jubilee, and 
forgotten practically every word of it Not that that mattered greatly, for most 
of it was lies She started the whole class over again at Julius Caesar’s invasion, 
and at first she tried taking history books out of the public library and reading 
them aloud to the children, but that method failed, because they could 
understand nothing that was not explained to them in words of one or two 
syllables So she did what she could in her own words and with her own 
inadequate knowledge, making a sort of paraphrase of what she read and 
delivering it to the children; striving all the while to drive into their dull little 
minds some picture of the past, and what was always more difficult, some 
interest m it But one day a brilliant idea struck her. She bought a roll of cheap 
plain wallpaper at an upholsterer’s shop, and set the children to making an 
historical chart. They marked the roll of paper mto centuries and years, and 
stuck scraps that they cut out of illustrated papers-pictures of kmghts in 
armour and Spanish galleons and printing-presses and railway trains-at the 
appropriate places Pinned round the walls of the room, the chart presented, as 
the scraps grew in number, a Sort of panorama of English history The children 
were even fonder of the chart than of the contour map. They always, Dorothy 
found, showed more intelligence when it was a question of making something 
instead of merely learning. There was even talk of making a contour map of the 
world, four feet by four, m papierm&ch 6 , if Dorothy could ‘get round’ Mrs 
Creevy to allow die preparation of the papierm&ch 6 -a messy process needing 
buckets of wafer* 

, Mrs Creevy watched Dorothy’s innovations with a jealous eye, but she did 
.pot inferfere actively at first She was not going to show it, of course, but she 



A Clergyman’ s Daughter 383 

was secretly amazed and delighted to find that she had got hold of an assistant 
who was actually willing to work When she saw Dorothy spending her own 
money on textbooks for the children, it gave her the same delicious sensation 
that she would have had m bringing off a successful swindle She did, however, 
sniff and grumble at everything that Dorothy did, and she wasted a great deal 
of time by insisting on what she called ‘thorough correction’ of the girls’ 
exercise books But her system of correction, like everything else m the school 
curriculum, was arranged with one eye on the parents Periodically the 
children took their books home for their parents’ inspection, and Mrs Creevy 
would never allow anything disparaging to be written in them Nothing was to 
be marked ‘bad’ or crossed out or too heavily underlined, mstead, m the 
evenings, Dorothy decorated the books, under Mrs Creevy’s dictation, with 
more or less applauding comments m red ink ‘A very creditable performance’, 
and ‘Excellent 1 You are making great strides Keep it up 1 ’ were Mrs Creevy’s 
favourites All the children in the school, apparently, were for ever ‘making 
great strides’, in what direction they were stridmg was not stated The parents, 
however, seemed willing to swallow an almost unlimited amount of this kind of 
thing 

There were times, of course, when Dorothy had trouble with the girls 
themselves The fact that they were all of different ages made them difficult to 
deal with, and though they were fond of her and were very ‘good’ with her at 
first, they would not have been children at all if they had been invariably 
‘good’ Sometimes they were lazy and sometimes they succumbed to that most 
damnable vice of schoolgirls-giggling For the first few days Dorothy was 
greatly exercised over little Mavis Williams, who was stupider than one would 
have believed it possible for any child of eleven to be Dorothy could do 
nothing with her at all At the first attempt to get her to do anything beyond 
pothooks a look of almost subhuman blankness would come into her wide-set 
eyes Sometimes, however, she had talkative fits in which she would ask the 
most amazing and unanswerable questions For instance, she would open her 
‘reader’, find one of the lllustrations-the sagacious Elephant, perhaps-and ask 
Dorothy 

‘Please, Miss, wass ’at thing there’’ (She mispronounced her words m a 
cunous manner ) 

‘That’s an elephant, Mavis ’ 

‘Wass a elephant’’ 

‘An elephant’s a kind of wild animal ’ 

‘Wass a animal’’ 

‘Well-a dog’s an animal ’ 

‘Wass a dog?’ 

And so on, more or less indefinitely About half-way through the fourth 
morning Mavis held up her hand and said with a sly politeness that ought to 
have put Dorothy on her guard 
‘Please, Miss, may I be ’scused’’ 

‘Yes,’ said Dorothy 

One of the bigger girls put up her hand, blushed, and put her hand down 



384 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

again as though too bashful to speak On being prompted by Dorothy, she said 
shamefacedly 

‘Please, Miss, Miss Strong didn’t used to let Mavis go to the lavatory alone 
She locks herself m and won’t come out, and then Mrs Creevy gets angry. 
Miss ’ 

Dorothy dispatched a messenger, but it was too late Mavis remained in 
latebra pudenda till twelve o’clock Afterwards, Mrs Creevy explained 
privately to Dorothy that Mavis was a congenital idiot- or, as she put it, ‘not 
right m the head’ It was totally impossible to teach her anything Of course, 
Mrs Creevy didn’t ‘let on’ to Mavis’s parents, who believed that their child 
was only ‘backward’ and paid their fees regularly Mavis was quite easy to deal 
with You just had to give her a book and a pencil and tell her to draw pictures 
and be quiet But Mavis, a child of habit, drew nothing but pothooks 
-remaining quiet and apparently happy for hours together, with her tongue 
hanging out, amid festoons of pothooks 

But in spite of these minor difficulties, how well everything went during 
those first few weeks 1 How ominously well, indeed 1 About the tenth of 
November, after much grumbling about the price of coal, Mrs Creevy started 
to allow a fire m the schoolroom The children’s wits brightened noticeably 
when the room was decently warm And there were happy hours, sometimes, 
when the fire crackled in the grate, and Mrs Creevy was out of the house, and 
the children were working quietly and absorbedly at one of the lessons that 
were their favourites Best of all was when the two top classes were reading 
Macbeth , the girls squeaking breathlessly through the scenes, and Dorothy 
pulling them up to make them pronounce the words properly and to tell them 
who Bellona’s bridegroom was and how witches rode on broomsticks, and the 
girls wanting to know, almost as excitedly as though it had been a detective 
story, how Birnam Wood could possible come to Dunsinane and Macbeth be 
killed by a man who was not of woman born Those are the times that make 
teaching worth while-the times when the children’s enthusiasm leaps up, like 
an answering flame, to meet your own, and sudden unlooked-for gleams of 
intelligence reward your earlier drudgery No job is more fascinating than 
teaching if you have a free hand at it Nor did Dorothy know, as yet, that that 
‘if’ is one of the biggest ‘ifs’ m the world 

Her job suited her, and she was happy in it She knew the minds of the 
children intimately by this time, knew their individual peculiarities and the 
special stimulants that were needed before you could get them to think She 
was more fond of them, more interested in their development, more anxious to 
do her best for them, than she would have conceived possible a short while ago 
The complex, never-ended labour of teaching filled her life just as the round of 
parish jobs had filled it at home She thought and dreamed of teaching, she 
took books out of the public library and studied theories of education. She felt 
that quite willingly she would go on teaching all her life, even at ten shillings a 
week and her keep, if it could always be like this It was her vocation, she 
thought* 

' Almost an^ job that fully occupied her would have been a relief after the 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 38 5 

horrible futility of the time of her destitution But this was more than a mere 
job, it was-so it seemed to her-a mission, a life-purpose Trying to awaken the 
dulled minds of these children, trying to undo the swindle that had been 
worked upon them in the name of education-that, surely, was something to 
which she could give herself heart and souP So for the time being, in the 
interest of her work, she disregarded the beastlmess of living in Mrs Creevy’s 
house, and quite forgot her strange, anomalous position and the uncertainty of 
her future 


4 


But of course, it could not last 

Not many weeks had gone by before the parents began interfering with 
Dorothy’s programme of work That-- trouble with the parents-is part of the 
regular routine of life in a private school All parents are tiresome from a 
teacher’s point of view, and the parents of children at fourth-rate private 
schools are utterly impossible On the one hand, they have only the dimmest 
idea of what is meant by education, on the other hand, they look on ‘schooling’ 
exactly as they look on a butcher’s bill or a grocer’s bill, and are perpetually 
suspicious that they are being cheated They bombard the teacher with lll- 
wntten notes making impossible demands, which they send by hand and 
which the child reads on the way to school At the end of the first fortnight 
Mabel Briggs, one of the most promising girls m the class, brought Dorothy 
the following note 

Dear Miss,-Would you please give Mabel a bit more arithmetic* I feel that what your givmg her 
is not practacle enpugh All these maps and that She wants practacle work, not all this fancy stuff 
So more arithmetic, please And remain, 

Yours Faithfully, 

Geo Briggs 

p s Mabel says your talking of starting her on something called decimals I don’t want her taught 
decimals, I want her taught arithmetic 


So Dorothy stopped Mabel’s geography and gave her extra arithmetic 
instead, whereat Mabel wept, More letters followed One lady was disturbed 
to hear that her child was being given Shakespeare to read ‘She had heard’, 
she wrote, ‘that this Mr Shakespeare was a writer of stage-plays, and was Miss 
Millborough quite certain that he wasn’t a very immoral writer? For her own 
part she had never so much as been to the pictures in her life, let alone to a 
stage-play, and she felt that even in readmg stage-plays there was a very grave 
danger,’ etc , etc She gave way, however, on being informed that Mr 
Shakespeare was dead This seemed to reassure her Another parent wanted 



y86 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

more attention to his child’s handwriting, and another thought French was a 
waste of time, and so it went on, until Dorothy’s carefully arranged time-table 
was almost m ruins Mrs Creevy gave her clearly to understand that whatever 
the parents demanded she must do, or pretend to do In many cases it was next 
door to impossible, for it disorganized everything to have one child studying, 
for instance, arithmetic while the rest of the class were doing history or 
geography But m private schools the parents’ word is law Such schools exist, 
like shops, by flattering their customers, and if a parent wanted his child taught 
nothing but cat’s-cradle and the cuneiform alphabet, the teacher would have to 
agree rather than lose a pupil 

The fact was that the parents were growing perturbed by the tales their 
children brought home about Dorothy’s methods They saw no sense 
whatever in these new-fangled ideas of making plasticine maps and reading 
poetry, and the old mechamcal routine which had so horrified Dorothy struck 
them as eminently sensible They became more and more restive, and their 
letters were peppered with the word ‘practical’, meaning m effect more 
handwriting lessons and more arithmetic And even their notion of arithmetic 
was limited to addition, subtraction, multiplication and ‘practice’, with long 
division thrown m as a spectacular tour deforce of no real value Very few of 
them could have worked out a sum in decimals themselves, and they were not 
particularly anxious for their children to be able to do so either 

However, if this had been all, there would probably never have been any 
serious trouble The parents would have nagged at Dorothy, as all parents do, 
but Dorothy would finally have learned-as, again, all teachers finally 
learn- that if one showed a certain amount of tact one could safely ignore them 
But there was one fact that was absolutely certain to lead to trouble, and that 
was the fact that the parents of all except three children were Nonconformists, 
whereas Dorothy was an Anglican It was true that Dorothy had lost her 
faith-mdeed, for two months past, m the press of varying adventures, had 
hardly thought either of her faith or of its loss But that made very little 
difference, Roman or Anglican, Dissenter, Jew, Turk or infidel, you retain the 
habits of thought that you have been brought up with Dorothy, born and bred 
m the precmcts of the Church, had no understanding of the Nonconformist 
mind With the best will in the world, she could not help doing things that 
would cause offence to some of the parents 

Almost at the beginning there was a skirmish over the Scripture 
lessons-twice a week the children used to read a couple of chapters from the 
Bible Old Testament and New Testament alternately- several of the parents 
writing to say, would Miss Millborough please not answer the children when 
they asked questions about the Virgin Msary, texts about the Virgin Mary were 
to be passed over m silence, or, if possible, missed out altogether But it was 
Shakespeare, that immoral writer, who brought things to a head The girls had 
worked their way through Macbeth , pining to know how the witches’ prophecy 
was to be fulfilled. They reached the closing scenes Birnam Wood had come to 
Dunsinane-that part was settled, anyway, now what about the man who was 
not of woman born* They came to the fatal passage 



A Clergyman' s Daughter 387 

macbeth Thou losest labour. 

As easy may’st thou the intrenchant air 
With thy keen sword impress, as make me bleed 
Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests, 

I bear a charmed life, which must not yield 
To one of woman born 

MACDUFF Despair thy charm. 

And let the Angel whom thou still hast served 
Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother’s womb 
Untimely ripp’d 


The girls looked puzzled There was a momentary silence, and then a chorus 
of voices round the room, 

‘Please, Miss, what does that mean?’ 

Dorothy explained She explained haltingly and incompletely, with a 
sudden horrid misgivmg-a premonition that this was going to lead to 
trouble-but still, she did explain. And after that, of course, the fun began 

About half the children m the class went home and asked their parents the 
meaning of the word ‘womb’ There was a sudden commotion, a flying to 
and fro of messages, an electric thrill of horror through fifteen decent 
Nonconformist homes That night the parents must have held some kmd of 
conclave, for the following evening, about the time when school ended, a 
deputation called upon Mrs Creevy Dorothy heard them arriving by ones and 
twos, and guessed what was going to happen As soon as she had dismissed the 
children, she heard Mrs Creevy call sharply down the stairs 

‘Come up here a minute. Miss Millborough 1 ’ 

Dorothy went up, trying to control the trembling of her knees In the gaunt 
drawing-room Mrs Creevy was standing grimly beside the piano, and six 
parents were sitting round on horsehair chairs like a circle of inquisitors 
There was the Mr Geo Briggs who had written the letter about Mabel’s 
anthmetic-he was an alert-looking greengrocer with a dried-up, shrewish 
wife-and there was a large, buffalo -like man with drooping moustaches and a 
colourless, peculiarly flat wife who looked as though she had been flattened out 
by the pressure of some heavy object-her husband, perhaps The names of 
these two Dorothy did not catch There was also Mrs Williams, the mother of 
the congenital idiot, a small, dark, very obtuse woman who always agreed with 
the last speaker, and there was a Mr Poynder, a commerical traveller He was a 
youngish to middle-aged man with a grey face, mobile lips, and a bald scalp 
across which some strips of rather nasty-looking damp hair were carefully 
plastered In honour of the parents’ visit, a fire composed of three large coals 
was sulking in the grate 

‘Sit down there, Miss Millborough,’ said Mrs Creevy, pointing to a hard 
chair which stood like a stool of repentance in the middle of the ring of parents 

Dorothy sat down 

‘And now/ said Mrs Creevy, ‘just you hsten to what Mr Poynder’s got to say 
to you,’ 

Mr Poynder had a great deal to say The other parents had evidently chosen 



$88 A Clergyman's Daughter 

him as their spokesman, and he talked till flecks of yellowish foam appeared at 
the corners of his mouth And what was remarkable, he managed to do it all-so 
nice was his regard for the decencies -without ever once repeating the word 
that had caused all the trouble 

‘I feel that I’m voicing the opinion of all of us,’ he said with his facile 
bagman’s eloquence, ‘in saying that if Miss Millborough knew that this 
play- Macduff, or whatever its name is- contained such words as- well, such 
words as we’re speaking about, she never ought to have given it to the children 
to read at all To my mind it’s a disgrace that schoolbooks can be printed with 
such words in them I’m sure if any of us had ever known that Shakespeare was 
that kind of stuff, we’d have put our foot down at the start It surprises me, I 
must say Only the other morning I was reading a piece m my News Chronicle 
about Shakespeare being the father of English Literature, well, if that’s 
Literature, let’s have a bit less Literature, say I' I think everyone’ll agree with 
me there And on the other hand, if Miss Millborough didn’t know that the 
word- well, the word I’m referring to- was coming, she just ought to have gone 
straight on and taken no notice when it did come There wasn’t the slightest 
need to go explaining it to them Just tell them to keep quiet and not get asking 
questions-that’s the proper way with children ’ 

‘But the children wouldn’t have understood the play if I hadn’t explained 1 ’ 
protested Dorothy for the third or fourth time 

‘Of course they wouldn’t 1 You don’t seem to get my point, Miss 
Millborough 1 We don’t want them to understand Do you think we want them 
to go picking up dirty ideas out of books 1 * Quite enough of that already with all 
these dirty films and these twopenny girls’ papers that they get hold of-all 
these filthy, dirty love-stories with pictures of-well, I won’t go into it We 
don’t send our children to school to have ideas put into their heads I’m 
speaking for all the parents in saying this We’re all of decent God-fearing 
folk-some of us are Baptists and some of us are Methodists, and there’s even 
one or two Church of England among us, but we can sink our differences when 
it comes to a case like this- and we try to bring our children up decent and save 
them from knowing anything about the Facts of Life If I had my way, no 
child-at any rate, no girl- would know anything about the Facts of Life till she 
was twenty-one ’ 

There was a general nod from the parents, and the buffalo-like man added, 
‘Yer, yer' I’m with you there, Mr Poynder Yer, yer*’ deep down m his inside 

After dealing with the subject of Shakespeare, Mr Poynder added some 
remarks about Dorothy’s new-fangled methods of teaching, which gave Mr 
Geo Briggs the opportunity to rap out from time to time, ‘That’s it 1 Practical 
work-that’s what we want-practical work 1 Not all this messy stuff like po’try 
and making maps and sticking scraps of paper and such like Give ’em a good 
bit of figuring and handwriting and bother the rest Practical work! You’ve 
said it>’ 

This went on for about twenty minutes At first Dorothy attempted to 
argue, but she saw Mrs Creevy angrily shaking her head at her over the 
buffalo-like man’s shoulder, which she rightly took as a signal to be quiet By 



A Clergyman's Daughter 389 

the time the parents had finished they had reduced Dorothy very nearly to 
tears, and after this they made ready to go But Mrs Creevy stopped them 
‘ Just a minute, ladies and gentlemen,’ she said ‘Now that you’ve all had 
your say-and I’m sure I’m most glad to give you the opportumty-I’d just like 
to say a little something on my own account Just to make things clear, in case 
any of you might think I was to blame for this nasty business that’s happened 
And you stay here too, Miss Millborough 1 ’ she added 

She turned on Dorothy, and, m front of the parents, gave her a venomous 
‘talking to’ which lasted upwards of ten minutes The burden of it all was that 
Dorothy had brought these dirty books into the house behind her back, that it 
was monstrous treachery and ingratitude, and that if anything like it happened 
again, out Dorothy would go with a week’s wages m her pocket She rubbed it 
in and in and in Phrases like ‘girl that I’ve taken into my house’, ‘eating my 
bread’, and even ‘living on my charity’, recurred over and over again The 
parents sat round watching, and m their crass faces-faces not harsh or evil, 
only blunted by ignorance and mean virtues-you could see a solemn approval, 
a solemn pleasure in the spectacle of sm rebuked Dorothy understood this, 
she understood that it was necessary that Mrs Creevy should give her her 
‘talking to’ m front of the parents, so that they might feel that they were gettmg 
their money’s worth and be satisfied But still, as the stream of mean, cruel 
reprimand went on and on, such anger rose m her heart that she could with 
pleasure have stood up and struck Mrs Creevy across the face Again and again 
she thought, ‘I won’t stand it, I won’t stand it any longer 1 I’ll tell her what I 
think of her and then walk straight out of the house 1 ’ But she did nothing of the 
kind She saw with dreadful clarity the helplessness of her position Whatever 
happened, whatever insults it meant swallowing, she had got to keep her job 
So she sat still, with pink humiliated face, amid the circle of parents, and 
presently her anger turned to misery, and she realized that she was going to 
begin crying if she did not struggle to prevent it But she realized, too, that if 
she began crying it would be the last straw and the parents would demand her 
dismissal To stop herself, she dug her nails so hard into the palms that 
afterwards she found that she had drawn a few drops of blood 
Presently the ‘talking to’ wore itself out m assurances from Mrs Creevy that 
this should never happen again and that the offending Shakespeares should be 
burnt immediately The parents were now satisfied Dorothy had had her 
lesson and would doubtless profit by it, they did not bear her any malice and 
were not conscious of having humiliated her They said good-bye to Mrs 
Creevy, said good-bye rather more coldly to Dorothy, and departed Dorothy 
also rose to go, but Mrs Creevy signed to her to stay where she was 
‘Just you wait a minute,’ she said ominously as the parents left the room ‘I 
haven’t finished yet, not by a long way I haven’t ’ 

Dorothy sat down again She felt very weak at the knees, and nearer to tears 
than ever Mrs Creevy, having shown the parents out by the front door, came 
back with a bowl of water and threw it over the fire-for where was the sense of 
burning good coals after the parents had gone^ Dorothy supposed that the 
‘talking to’ was going to begin afresh. However, Mrs Creevy’s wrath seemed to 



3yo A Clergyman 3 s Daughter 

have cooled-at any rate, she had laid aside the air of outraged virtue that it had 
been necessary to put on m front of the parents 
‘I just want to have a bit of a talk with you. Miss Millborough,’ she said ‘It’s 
about time we got it settled once and for all how this school’s going to be run 
and how it’s not going to be run ’ 
c Yes,’ said Dorothy 

‘Well, I’ll be straight with you When you came here I could see with half an 
eye that you didn’t know the first thing about school-teaching, but I wouldn’t 
have minded that if you’d just had a bit of common sense like any other girl 
would have had Only it seems you hadn’t I let you have your own way for a 
week or two, and the first thing you do is to go and get all the parents’ backs up 
Well, I’m not going to have that over again From now on I’m going to have 
things done my way, not your way Do you understand that?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Dorothy again 

‘You’re not to think as I can’t do without you, mind,’ proceeded Mrs 
Creevy ‘I can pick up teachers at two a penny any day of the week, M A s and 
BAs and all Only the M A s and BAs mostly take to drink, or else 
they-well, no matter what-and I will say for you you -don’t seem to be given to 
the drink or anything of that kind I dare say you and me can get on all right if 
you’ll drop these new-fangled ideas of yours and understand what’s meant by 
practical school-teaching So just you listen to me ’ 

Dorothy listened With admirable clarity, and with a cynicism that was all 
the more disgusting because it was utterly unconscious, Mrs Creevy explained 
the technique of the dirty swindle that she called practical school-teaching 
‘What you’ve got to get hold of once and for all,’ she began, ‘is that there’s 
only one thing that matters m a school, and that’s the fees As for all this stuff 
about “developing the children’s minds”, as you call it, it’s neither here nor 
there It’s the fees I’m after, not developing the children's minds After all, it’s no 
more than common sense It’s not to be supposed as anyone’d go to all the 
trouble of keeping school and having the house turned upside down by a pack 
of brats, if it wasn’t that there’s a bit of money to be made out of it The fees 
come first, and everything else comes afterwards Didn’t I tell you that the 
very first day you came here?’ 

‘Yes,’ admitted Dorothy humbly 

‘Well, then, it’s the parents that pay the fees, and it’s the parents you’ve got 
to think about. Do what the parents want-that’s our rule here. I dare say all 
this messing about with plasticine and paper-scraps that you go in for doesn’t 
do the children any particular harm, but the parents don’t want it, and there’s 
an end of it Well, there’s just two subjects that they do want their children 
taught, and that’s handwriting and arithmetic Especially handwriting. That’s 
something they can see the sense of And so handwriting’s the thing you’ve got 
to keep on and on at Plenty of nice neat copies that the girls can take home, and 
that the parents’ll show off to the neighbours and give us a bit of a free advert I 
want you to give the children two hours a day just at handwriting and nothing 
else,’ 

‘Two hours a day just at handwriting,’ repeated Dorothy obediently 



A Clergyman's Daughter 391 

‘Yes And plenty of arithmetic as well The parents are very keen on 
arithmetic especially money-sums Keep your eye on the parents all the time 
If you meet one of them m the street, get hold of them and start talking to them 
about their own girl Make out that she’s the best girl in the class and that if she 
stays just three terms longer she’ll be working wonders You see what I mean? 
Don’t go and tell them there’s no room for improvement, because if you tell 
them that , they generally take their girls away Just three terms longer-that’s 
the thing to tell them And when you make out the end of term reports, just you 
bring them to me and let me have a good look at them I like to do the marking 
myself ’ 

Mrs Creevy’s eye met Dorothy’s She had perhaps been about to say that she 
always arranged the marks so that every girl came out somewhere near the top 
of the class, but she refrained Dorothy could not answer for a moment 
Outwardly she was subdued, and very pale, but m her heart were anger and 
deadly repulsion against which she had to struggle before she could speak She 
had no thought, however, of contradicting Mrs Creevy The ‘talking to’ had 
quite broken her spirit She mastered her voice, and said 
‘I’m to teach nothing but handwriting and arithmetic-is that it?’ 

‘Well, I didn’t say that exactly There’s plenty of other subjects that look 
well on the prospectus French, for instance- French looks very well on the 
prospectus But it’s not a subject you want to waste much time over Don’t go 
filling them up with a lot of grammar and syntax and verbs and all that That 
kind of stuff doesn’t get them anywhere so far as I can see Give them a bit of 
“Parley vous Francey”, and “Passey moi le beurre”, and so forth, that’s a lot 
more use than grammar And then there’s Latin-I always put Latin on the 
prospectus But I don’t suppose you’re very great on Latm, are you?’ 

‘No,’ admitted Dorothy 

‘Well, it doesn’t matter You won’t have to teach it None of our parents’d 
want their children to waste time over Latm But they like to see it on the 
prospectus. It looks classy Of course there’s a whole lot of subjects that we 
can’t actually teach, but we have to advertise them all the same Book-keeping 
and typing and shorthand, for instance, besides music and dancing It all looks 
well on the prospectus ’ 

‘Arithmetic, handwriting, French-is there anything else?’ Dorothy said 
‘Oh, well, history and geography and English Literature, of course. But just 
drop that map-making business at once-it’s nothing but waste of time The 
best geography to teach is lists of capitals Get them so that they can rattle off 
the capitals of all the English counties as if it was the multiplication table 
Then they’ve got something to show for what they’ve learnt, anyway And as 
for history, keep on with the Hundred Page History of Bntian I won’t have 
them taught out of those big history books you keep bringing home from the 
library I opened one of those books the other day, and the first thing I saw was 
a piece where it said the English had been beaten in some battle or other 
There’s amice thing to go teaching children' The parents won’t stand for that 
kind of dung, I can tell you'’ 

‘And Literature?’ said Dorothy, 



3$2 A Clergyman's Daughter 

‘Well, of course they’ve got to do a bit of reading, and I can’t think why you 
wanted to turn up your nose at those nice little readers of ours Keep on with 
the readers They’re a bit old, but they’re quite good enough for a pack of 
children, I should have thought And I suppose they might as well learn a few 
pieces of poetry by heart Some of the parents like to hear their children say a 
piece of poetry “The Boy stood on the Burning Deck”-that’s a very good 
piece-and then there’s “The Wreck of the Steamer”-now, what was that ship 
called^ “The Wreck of the Steamer Hesperus” A little poetry doesn’t hurt 
now and again But don’t let’s have any more Shakespeare , please 1 ’ 

Dorothy got no tea that day It was now long past tea-time, but when Mrs 
Creevy had finished her harangue she sent Dorothy away without saying 
anything about tea Perhaps this was a little extra punishment for Vaffaire 
Macbeth 

Dorothy had not asked permission to go out, but she did not feel that she 
could stay m the house any longer She got her hat and coat and set out down 
the ill-lit road, for the public library It was late into November Though the 
day had been damp the night wind blew sharply, like a threat, through the 
almost naked trees, making the gas-lamps flicker in spite of their glass 
chimneys, and stirring the sodden plane leaves that littered the pavement 
Dorothy shivered slightly The raw wind sent through her a bone-deep 
memory of the cold of T rafalgar Square And though she did not actually think 
that if she lost her job it would mean going back to the sub-world from which 
she had come-mdeed, it was not so desperate as that, at the worst her cousin or 
somebody else would help her-still, Mrs Creevy’s ‘talking to’ had made 
Trafalgar Square seem suddenly very much nearer It had driven into her a far 
deeper understanding than she had had before of the great modern 
commandment-the eleventh commandment which has wiped out all the 
others ‘Thou shalt not lose thy job ’ 

But as to what Mrs Creevy had said about ‘practical school-teaching’, it had 
been no more than a realistic facing of the facts She had merely said aloud 
what most people in her position think but never say Her oft-repeated phrase, 
‘It’s the fees I’m after’, was a motto that might be-mdeed, ought to 
be- written over the doors of every private school m England. 

There are, by the way, vast numbers of private schools in England Second- 
rate, third-rate, and fourth-rate (Rmgwood House was a specimen of the 
fourth-rate school), they exist by the dozen and the score m every London 
suburb and every provincial town At any given moment there are somewhere 
m the neighbourhood of ten thousand of them, of which less than a thousand 
are subject to Government mspection And though some of them are better 
than others, and a certain number, probably, are better than the council 
schools with which they compete, there is the same fundamental evil in all of 
them, that is, that they have ultimately no purpose except to make money. 
Often, except that there is nothing illegal about them, they are started in 
exactly the same spirit as one would start a brothel or a bucket shop Some 
snuffy little man of business (it is quite usual for these schools to be owned by 
people who don’t teach themselves) says one morning to his wife 



A Clergyman's Daughter 393 

‘Emma, I got a notion 1 What you say to us two keeping school, eh? There’s 
plenty of cash m a school, you know, and there ain’t the same work m it as what 
there is m a shop or a pub Besides, you don’t risk nothing, no over’ead to 
worry about, ’cept jest your rent and few desks and a blackboard But we’ll do 
it in style Get in one of these Oxford and Cambridge chaps as is out of a job 
and’ll come cheap, and dress ’im up in a gown and-what do they call them 
little square ’ats with tassels on top? That ’ud fetch the parents, eh? You jest 
keep your eyes open and see if you can’t pick on a good district where there’s 
not too many on the same game already ’ 

He chooses a situation in one of those middle-class districts where the 
people are too poor to afford the fees of a decent school and too proud to send 
their children to the council schools, and ‘sets up’ By degrees he works up a 
connexion m very much the same manner as a milkman or a greengrocer, and if 
he is astute and tactful and has not too many competitors, he makes his few 
hundreds a year out of it 

Of course, these schools are not all alike Not every principal is a grasping 
low-minded shrew like Mrs Creevy, and there are plenty of schools where the 
atmosphere is kindly and decent and the teaching is as good as one could 
reasonably expect for fees of five pounds a term On the other hand, some of 
them are crying scandals Later on, when Dorothy got to know one of the 
teachers at another private school in Southbndge, she heard tales of schools 
that were worse by far than Ringwood House She heard of a cheap boarding- 
school where travelling actors dumped their children as one dumps luggage m 
a railway cloakroom, and where the children simply vegetated, doing 
absolutely nothing, reachmg the age of sixteen without learning to read, and 
another school where the days passed m a perpetual not, with a broken-down 
old hack of a master chasing the boys up and down and slashing at them with a 
cane, and then suddenly collapsing and weeping with his head on a desk, while 
the boys laughed at him So long as schools are run primarily for money, things 
hke this will happen The expensive private schools to which the rich send 
their children are not, on the surface, so bad as the others, because they can 
afford a proper staff, and the Public School examination system keeps them up 
to the mark, but they have the same essential taint 

It was only later, and by degrees, that Dorothy discovered these facts about 
private schools. At first, she used to suffer from an absurd fear that one day the 
school mspectors would descend upon Ringwood House, find out what a sham 
and a swindle it all was, and raise the dust accordingly Later on, however, she 
learned that this could never happen Ringwood House was not ‘recognized’, 
and therefore was not liable to be inspected One day a Government inspector 
did, indeed, visit the school, but beyond measuring the dimensions of the 
schoolroom to see whether each girl had her right number of cubic feet of air, 
he did nothing; he had no power to do more Only the tiny minority of 
‘recognized’ schools— less than one in ten-are officially tested to decide 
whether they keep up a reasonable educational standard As for the others, 
they are free to teach or not teach exactly as they choose No one controls or 
inspects them except the children’s parents- the blind leading the blind. 



5 


Next day Dorothy began altering her programme in accordance with Mrs 
Creevy’s orders The first lesson of the day was handwriting, and the second 
was geography 

‘That’ll do, girls,’ said Dorothy as the funereal clock struck ten ‘We’ll start 
our geography lesson now ’ 

The girls flung their desks open and put their hated copybooks away with 
audible sighs of relief There were murmurs of ‘Oo, jography 1 Good 1 ’ It was 
one of their favourite lessons The two girls who were ‘monitors’ for the week, 
and whose job it was to clean the blackboard, collect exercise books and so 
forth (children will fight for the privilege of doing jobs of that kind), leapt from 
their places to fetch the half-finished contour map that stood against the wall 
But Dorothy stopped them 

‘Wait a moment Sit down, you two We aren’t going to go on with the map 
this morning ’ 

There was a cry of dismay ‘Oh, Miss 1 Why can’t we, Miss? Please let’s go on 
with it •* 

‘No I’m afraid we’ve been wasting a little too much time over the map 
lately We’re going to start learning some of the capitals of the English 
counties I want every girl in the class to know the whole lot of them by the end 
of the term ’ 

The children’s faces 'fell Dorothy saw it, and added with an attempt at 
bnghtness-that hollow, undeceiving brightness of a teacher trying to palm off 
a boring subject as an interesting one 

‘Just think how pleased your parents will be when they can ask you the 
capital of any county in England and you can tell it them 1 ’ 

The children were not m the least taken in They writhed at the nauseous 
prospect 

‘Oh, capitals' Learning capitals'. That’s just what we used to do with Miss 
Strong, Please, Miss, why can’t we go on with the map?’ 

‘Now don’t argue Get your notebooks out and take them down as I give 
them to you And afterwards we’ll say them all together ’ 

Reluctantly, the children fished out their notebooks, still groaning ‘Please, 
Miss, can we go on with the map next time?’ 

‘I don’t know. We’ll see ’ 

That afternoon the map was removed from the schoolroom, and Mrs Creevy 
scraped the plasticine off the board and threw it away It was the same with all 



A Clergyman's Daughter 395 

the other subjects, one after another All the changes that Dorothy had made 
were undone They went back to the routine of interminable ‘copies’ and 
interminable ‘practice’ sums, to the learmng parrot-fashion of c Passez-moi le 
beurre 3 and c Le fils du jar dimer a perdu son chapeau' , to the Hundred Page 
History and the insufferable little ‘reader’ (Mrs Creevy had impounded the 
Shakespeares, ostensibly to burn them The probability was that she had sold 
them ) Two hours a day were set apart for handwriting lessons The two 
depressing pieces of black paper, which Dorothy had taken down from the 
wall, were replaced, and their proverbs written upon them afresh m neat 
copperplate As for the historical chart, Mrs Creevy took it away and burnt it 
When the children saw the hated lessons, from which they had thought to 
have escaped for ever, coming back upon them one by one, they were first 
astonished, then miserable, then sulky But it was far worse for Dorothy than 
for the children After only a couple of days the rigmarole through which she 
was obliged to drive them so nauseated her that she began to doubt whether 
she could go on with it any longer Again and again she toyed with the idea of 
disobeying Mrs Creevy Why not, she would think, as the children whined and 
groaned and sweated under their miserable bondage-why not stop it and go 
back to proper lessons, even if it was only for an hour or two a day? Why not 
drop the whole pretence of lessons and simply let the children play? It would 
be so much better for them than this Let them draw pictures or make 
something out of plasticine or begm making up a fairy tale-anythmg real, 
anything that would interest them, instead of this dreadful nonsense But she 
dared not At any moment Mrs Creevy was liable to come m, and if she found 
the children ‘messing about’ instead of getting on with their routine work, 
there would be fearful trouble So Dorothy hardened her heart, and obeyed 
Mrs Creevy’s instructions to the letter, and things were very much as they had 
been before Miss Strong was ‘taken bad’ 

The lessons reached such a pitch of boredom that the brightest spot m the 
week was Mr Booth’s so-called chemistry lecture on Thursday afternoons Mr 
Booth was a seedy, tremulous man of about fifty, with long, wet, cowdung- 
coloured moustaches He had been a Public School master once upon a time, 
but nowadays he made just enough for a life of chrome sub-drunkenness by 
delivering lectures at two and sixpence a time The lectures were unrelieved 
drivel Even m his palmiest days Mr Booth had not been a particularly brilliant 
lecturer, and now, when he had had his first go of delirium tremens and lived m 
a daily dread of his second, what chemical knowledge he had ever had was fast 
deserting him He would stand dithering in front of the class, saymg the same 
thing over and over again and trying vainly to remember what he was talking 
about ‘Remember, girls,’ he would say in his husky, would-be fatherly voice, 
‘the number of the elements is ninety-three-ninety-three elements, girls-you 
all of you know what an element is, don’t you?-there are just ninety-three of 
them-remember that number, girls-nmety-three,’ until Dorothy (she had to 
stay in the schoolroom during the chemistry lectures, because Mrs Creevy 
considered that it didn't do to leave the girls alone with a man) was miserable 
with vicarious shame All the lectures* started with the ninety-three elements, 



396 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

and never got very much further There was also talk of ‘a very interesting 
little experiment that I’m going to perform for you next week, girls- very 
interesting you’ll find it- we’ll have it next week without fail-a very interesting 
little experiment’, which, needless to say, was never performed Mr Booth 
possessed no chemical apparatus, and his hands were far too shaky to have 
used it even if he had had any The girls sat through his lectures m a suety 
stupor of boredom, but even he was a welcome change from handwriting 
lessons 

The children were never quite the same with Dorothy after the parents’ 
visit They did not change all m a day, of course They had grown to be fond of 
‘old Millie’, and they expected that after a day or two of tormenting them with 
handwriting and ‘commercial arithmetic’ she would go back to something 
interesting But the handwriting and arithmetic went on, and the popularity 
Dorothy had enjoyed, as a teacher whose lessons weren’t boring and who 
didn’t slap you, pinch you, or twist your ears, gradually vanished Moreover, 
the story of the row there had been over Macbeth was not long m leaking out 
The children grasped that old Millie had done something wrong-they didn’t 
exactly know what-and had been given a ‘talking to’ It lowered her in their 
eyes There is no dealing with children, even with children who are fond of 
you, unless you can keep your prestige as an adult, let that prestige be once 
damaged, and even the best-hearted children will despise you 

So they began to be naughty in the normal, traditional way Before, Dorothy 
had only had to deal with occasional laziness, outbursts of noise and silly 
giggling fits, now there were spite and deceitfulness as well The children 
revolted ceaselessly against the horrible routine They forgot the short weeks 
when old Millie had seemed quite a good sort and school itself had seemed 
rather fun Now, school was simply what it had always been, and what indeed 
you expected it to be-a place where you slacked and yawned and whiled the 
time away by pinching your neighbour and trying to make the teacher lose her 
temper, and from which you burst with a yell of relief the instant the last lesson 
was over Sometimes they sulked and had fits of crying, sometimes they argued 
m the maddening persistent way that children have, f Why should we do this? 
Why does anyone have to learn to read and write?’ over and over again, until 
Dorothy had to stand over them and silence them with threats of blows She 
was growing almost habitually irritable nowadays, it surprised and shocked 
her, but she could not stop it Every morning she vowed to herself, ‘Today I 
will not lose my temper’, and every morning, with depressing regularity, she 
did lose her temper, especially at about half past eleven when the children were 
at their worst Nothing in the world is quite so irritating as dealing with 
mutinous children Sooner or later, Dorothy knew, she would lose control of 
herself and begm hitting them It seemed to her an unforgivable thing to do, to 
hit a child, but nearly all teachers come to it in the end It was impossible now 
to get any child to work except when your eye was upon it You had only to 
turn your back for an instant and blotting-paper pellets were flying to and fro 
Nevertheless, with ceaseless slave-driving the children’s handwriting and 
‘commercial arithmetic’ did certainly show some improvement, and no doubt 



A Clergyman’ s Daughter 


397 


the parents were satisfied 

The last few weeks of the term were a very bad time For over a fortnight 
Dorothy was quite penniless, for Mrs Creevy had told her that she couldn’t 
pay her her term’s wages ‘till some of the fees came in’ So she was deprived of 
the secret slabs of chocolate that had kept her going, and she suffered from a 
perpetual slight hunger that made her languid and spiritless There were 
leaden mornings when the minutes dragged like hours, when she struggled 
with herself to keep her eyes away from the clock, and her heart sickened to 
think that beyond this lesson there loomed another just like it, and more of 
them and more, stretching on into what seemed like a dreary eternity Worse 
yet were the times when the children were in their noisy mood and it needed a 
constant exhausting effort of the will to keep them under control at all, and 
beyond the wall, of course, lurked Mrs Creevy, always listening, always ready 
to descend upon the schoolroom, wrench the door open, and glare round the 
room with ‘Now then 1 What’s all this noise about, please^’ and the sack m her 
eye 

Dorothy was fully awake, now, to the beastliness of living in Mrs Creevy’s 
house The filthy food, the cold, and the lack of baths seemed much more 
important than they had seemed a little while ago Moreover, she was 
beginning to appreciate, as she had not done when the joy of her work was 
fresh upon her, the utter loneliness of her position Neither her father nor Mr 
Warburton had written to her, and m two months she had made not a single 
friend in Southbndge For anyone so situated, and particularly for a woman, it 
is all but impossible to make friends She had no money and no home* of her 
own, and outside the school her sole places of refuge were the public library, 
on the few evenings when she could get there, and church on Sunday 
mornings She went to church regularly, of course-Mrs Creevy had insisted 
on that She had settled the question of Dorothy’s religious observances at 
breakfast on her first Sunday morning 

‘I’ve just been wondering what Place of Worship you ought to go to,’ she 
said ‘I suppose you were brought up C of E , weren’t you>’ 

‘Yes,’ said Dorothy 

‘Hm, well I can’t quite make up my mind where to send you There’s St 
George’s-that’s the C of E -and there’s the Baptist Chapel where I go 
myself Most of our parents are Nonconformists, and I don’t know as they’d 
quite approve of a C of E teacher You can’t be too careful with the parents 
They had a bit of a scare two years ago when it turned out that the teacher I had 
then was actually a Roman Catholic, if you please f Of course she kept it dark as 
long as she could, but it came out in the end, and three of the parents took their 
children away I got rid of her the same day as I found it out, naturally ’ 

Dorothy was silent 

‘ Still, ? went on Mrs Creevy, ‘we have got three C of E pupils, and I don’t 
know as the Church connexion mightn’t be worked up a bit So perhaps you’d 
better risk it and go to St George’s But you want to be a bit careful, you know 
I’m told St George’s is one of these churches where they go in for a lot of 
bowing and scraping and crossing yourself and all that We’ve got two parents 



398 A Clergyman's Daughter 

that are Plymouth Brothers, and they’d throw a fit if they heard you’d been 
seen crossing yourself So don’t go and do that 3 whatever you do ’ 

‘Very well,’ said Dorothy 

‘And just you keep your eyes well open during the sermon Have a good look 
round and see if there’s any young girls m the congregation that we could get 
hold of If you see any likely looking ones, get on to the parson afterwards and 
try and find out their names and addresses ’ 

So Dorothy went to St George’s It was a shade ‘Higher’ than St Athelstan’s 
had been, chairs, not pews, but no incense, and the vicar (his name was Mr 
Gore-Williams) wore a plain cassock and surplice except on festival days As 
for the services, they were so like those at home that Dorothy could go through 
them, and utter all the responses at the right moment, in a state of the 
completest abstraction 

There was never a moment when the power of worship returned to her 
Indeed, the whole concept of worship was meaningless to her now, her faith 
had vanished, utterly and irrevocably It is a mysterious thing, the loss of 
faith-as mysterious as faith itself Like faith, it is ultimately not rooted in 
logic, it is a change m the climate of the mind But however little the church 
services might mean to her, she did not regret the hours she spent m church 
On the contrary, she looked forward to her Sunday mornings as blessed 
interludes of peace, and that not only because Sunday morning meant a respite 
from Mrs Creevy’s prying eye and nagging voice In another and deeper sense 
the atmosphere of the church was soothing and reassuring to her For she 
perceived that in all that happens m church, however absurd and cowardly its 
supposed purpose may be, there is somethmg-it is hard to define, but 
something of decency, of spiritual comehness-that is not easily found in the 
world outside It seemed to her that even though you no longer believe, it is 
better to go to church than not, better to follow m the ancient ways, than to 
drift in rootless freedom. She knew very well that she would never again be 
able to utter a prayer and mean it, but she knew also that for the rest of her life 
she must contmue with the observances to which she had been bred. Just this 
much remained to her of the faith that had once, like the bones m a living 
frame, held all her life together 

But as yet she did not think very deeply about the loss of her faith and what it 
might mean to her in the future. She was too busy merely existing, merely 
struggling to make her nerves hold out for the rest of that miserable term For 
as the term drew to an end, the job of keeping the class m order grew more and 
more exhausting. The girls behaved atrociously, and they were all the bitterer 
against Dorothy because they had once been fond of her She had deceived 
them, they felt She had started off by being decent, and now she had turned 
out to be just a beastly old teacher like the rest of them-a nasty old beast who 
kept on and on with those awful handwriting lessons and snapped your head 
off if you so much as made a blot on your book. Dorothy caught them eyeing 
her face, sometimes, with the aloof, cruel scrutiny of children They had 
thought her pretty once, and now they thought her ugly, old, and scraggy She 
had grown, indeed, much thinner since she had been at Rmgwood House 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 399 

They hated her now, as they had hated all their previous teachers 

Sometimes they baited her quite deliberately The older and more 
intelligent girls understood the situation well enough-understood that Millie 
was under old Creevy’s thumb and that she got dropped on afterwards when 
they had been making too much noise, sometimes they made all the noise they 
dared, just so as to bring old Creevy m and have the pleasure of watching 
Millie’s face while old Creevy told her off There were times when Dorothy 
could keep her temper and forgive them all they did, because she realized that 
it was only a healthy instinct that made them rebel against the loathsome 
monotony of their work But there were other times when her nerves were 
more on edge than usual, and when she looked round at the score of silly little 
faces, grinning or mutinous, and found it possible to hate them Children are 
so blind, so selfish, so merciless They do not know when they are tormenting 
you past bearing, and if they did know they would not care You may do your 
very best for them, you may keep your temper in situations that would try a 
saint, and yet if you are forced to bore them and oppress them, they will hate 
you for it without ever asking themselves whether it is you who are to blame 
How true-when you happen not to be a school-teacher yourself-how true 
those often-quoted lines sound- 

Under a cruel eye outworn 
The little ones spend the day 
m sighing and dismay 1 

But when you yourself are the cruel eye outworn, you realize that there is 
another side to the picture 

The last week came, and the dirty farce of ‘exams’, was carried through The 
system, as explained by Mrs Creevy, was quite simple. You coached the 
children m, for example, a series of sums until you were quite certain that they 
could get them right, and then set them the same sums as an arithmetic paper 
before they had time to forget the answers, and so with each subject m turn 
The children’s papers were, of course, sent home for their parents’ inspection 
And Dorothy wrote the reports under Mrs Creevy’s dictation, and she had to 
write ‘excellent’ so many times that-as sometimes happens when you write a 
word over and over again-she forgot how to spell it and began writing m 
‘excelent’, ‘exsellent‘, ‘ecsellent’, ‘eccelent’ 

The last day passed in fearful tumults Not even Mrs Creevy herself could 
keep the children m order By midday Dorothy’s nerves were in rags, and Mrs 
Creevy gave her a ‘talking to’ in front of the seven children who stayed to 
dinner In the afternoon the noise was worse than ever, and at last Dorothy, 
overcome, appealed to the girls almost tearfully to stop 
‘Girls 1 ’ she called out, rising her voice to make herself heard through the 
dm ‘ Please stop it, please' You’re behaving horribly to me Do you think it’s 
kind to go on like this?’ 

That was fatal, of course Never, never, never throw yourself on the mercy 
of a child* There was an instant’s hush, and then one child cried out, loudly 
and derisively, ‘Mill-iee 1 ’ The next moment the whole class had taken it up. 



zfoo A Clergyman’s Daughter 

even the imbecile Mavis, chanting all together 'Mill-iee' Mill-iee 1 Mill-iee*’ At 
that, something within Dorothy seemed to snap She paused for an instant, 
picked out the girl who was making the most noise, walked up to her, and gave 
her a smack across the ear almost as hard as she could hit Happily it was only 
one of the ‘medium payers’ 


6 


On the first day of the holidays Dorothy received a letter from Mr Warburton 

My Dear Dorothy [he wrote], — Or should I call you Ellen, as I understand that is your new 
name’ You must, I am afraid, have thought it very heartless of me not to have written sooner, but I 
assure you that it was not until ten days ago that I even heard anything about our supposed 
escapade I have been abroad, first in various parts of France, then in Austria and then m Rome, 
and, as you know, I avoid my fellow countrymen most strenuously on these trips They are 
disgusting enough even at home, but in foreign parts their behaviour makes me so ashamed of 
them that I generally try to pass myself off as an American 

When I got to Knype Hill your father refused to see me, but I managed to get hold of Victor 
Stone, who gave me your address and the name you are using He seemed rather reluctant to do so, 
and I gathered that even he, like everyone else in this poisonous town, still believes that you have 
misbehaved yourself in some way I think the theory that you and I eloped together has been 
dropped, but you must, they feel, have done something scandalous A young woman has left home 
suddenly, therefore there must be a man in the case, that is how the provincial mind works, you 
see I need not tell you that I have been contradicting the whole story with the utmost vigour You 
will be glad to hear that I managed to comer that disgusting hag, Mrs Sempnll, and give her a 
piece of my mind, and I assure you that a piece of my mind is distinctly formidable But the woman 
is simply sub-human I could get nothing out of her except hypocritical snivellings about ‘poor, 
poor Dorothy’ 

I hear that your father misses you very much, and would gladly have you home again if it were 
not for the scandal His meals are never punctual nowadays, it seems He gives it out that you ‘went 
away to recuperate from a slight illness and have now got an excellent post at a girls’ school’ You 
will be surpised to hear of one thing that has happened to him He has been obliged to pay off all his 
debts 1 1 am told that the tradesmen rose in a body and held what was practically a creditors’ 
meeting in the Rectory Not the kind of thing that could have happened at Plumstead 
Episcopi-but these are democratic days, alas' You, evidently, were the only person who could 
keep the tradesmen permanently at bay 

And now I must tell you some of my own news, etc , etc , etc 

At this point Dorothy tore the letter up in disappointment and even m 
annoyance He might have shown a little more sympathy* she thought It was 
just like Mr Warburton after getting her into serious trouble-for after all, he 
was principally to blame for what had happened-to be so flippant and 
unconcerned about it But when she had thought it over she acquitted him of 
heartlessness. He had done what little was possible to help her, and he could 
not be expected to pity her for troubles of which he had not heard Besides, his 
own life had been a senes of resounding scandals; probably he could not 
understand that to a woman a scandal is a senous matter 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 401 

At Christmas Dorothy’s father also wrote* and what was more* sent her a 
Christmas present of two pounds It was evident from the tone of his letter that 
he had forgiven Dorothy by this time What exactly he had forgiven her was 
not certain, because it was not certain what exactly she had done, but still* he 
had forgiven her The letter started with some perfunctory but quite friendly 
inquiries He hoped her new job suited her, he wrote And were her rooms at 
the school comfortable and the rest of the staff congemaP He had heard that 
they did one very well at schools nowadays-very different from what it had 
been forty years ago Now, m his day, etc , etc * etc He had, Dorothy 
perceived, not the dimmest idea of her present circumstances At the mention 
of schools his mind flew to Winchester, his old school, such a place as 
Ringwood House was beyond his imagining 

The rest of the letter was taken up with grumblings about the way things 
were going m the parish The Rector complained of being worried and 
overworked The wretched churchwardens kept bothering him with this and 
that, and he was growing very tired of Proggett’s reports about the collapsing 
belfry, and the daily woman whom he had engaged to help Ellen was a great 
nuisance and had put her broom-handle through the face of the grandfather 
clock in his study-and so on, and so forth, for a number of pages He said 
several times in a mumbling roundabout way that he wished Dorothy were 
there to help him, but he did not actually suggest that she should come home 
Evidently it was still necessary that she should remain out of sight and out of 
mind-a skeleton m a distant and well-locked cupboard 

The letter filled Dorothy with sudden painful homesickness She found 
herself pining to be back at her parish visiting and her Girl Guides’ cooking 
class, and wondering unhappily how her father had got on without her all this 
while and whether those two women were looking after him properly She was 
fond of her father, in a way that she had never dared to show, for he was not a 
person to whom you could make any display of affection It surprised and 
rather shocked her to realize how little he had been m her thoughts during the 
past four months There had been periods of weeks at a time when she had 
forgotten his existence But the truth was that the mere business of keeping 
body and soul together had left her with no leisure for other emotions 

Now, however, school work was over, and she had leisure and to spare, for 
though Mrs Creevy did her best she could not invent enough household jobs to 
keep Dorothy busy for more than part of the day She made it quite plain to 
Dorothy that during the holidays she was nothing but a useless expense, and 
she watched her at her meals (obviously feeling it an outrage that she should 
eat when she wasn’t working) in a way that finally became unbearable So 
Dorothy kept out of the house as much as possible, and, feeling fairly rich with 
her wages (four pounds ten, for nine weeks) and her father’s two pounds, she 
took to buying sandwiches at the ham and beef shop in the town and eating her 
dinner out of doors Mrs Creevy acquiesced, half sulkily because she liked to 
have Dorothy in the house to nag at her, and half pleased at the chance of 
skimping a few more meals 

Dorothy went for long solitary walks, exploring Southbridge and ns yet 



402 A Clergyman' s Daughter 

more desolate neighbours, Dorley, Wembridge, and West Holton Winter had 
descended, dank and windless, and more gloomy m those colourless 
labyrinthine suburbs than in the bleakest wilderness On two or three 
occasions, though such extravagance would probably mean hungry days later 
on, Dorothy took a cheap return ticket to Iver Heath or Burnham Beeches 
The woods were sodden and wintry, with great beds of drifted beech leaves 
that glowed like copper m the still, wet air, and the days were so mild that you 
could sit out of doors and read if you kept your gloves on On Christmas Eve 
Mrs Creevy produced some sprigs of holly that she had saved from last year, 
dusted them, and nailed them up, but she did not, she said, intend to have a 
Christmas dinner She didn’t hold with all this Christmas nonsense, she 
said-it was just a lot of humbug got up by the shopkeepers, and such an 
unnecessary expense, and she hated turkey and Christmas pudding anyway 
Dorothy was relieved, a Christmas dinner m that joyless ‘morning-room’ (she 
had an awful momentary vision of Mrs Creevy m a paper hat out of a cracker) 
was something that didn’t bear thinking about She ate her Christmas 
dmner-a hard-boiled egg, two cheese sandwiches, and a bottle of 
lemonade-m the woods near Burnham, against a great gnarled beech tree, 
over a copy of George Gissmg’s The Odd Women 
On days when it was too wet to go for walks she spent most of her time m the 
public library-becoming, indeed, one of the regular habituees of the library, 
along with the out-of-work men who sat drearily musing over illustrated 
papers which they did not read, and the elderly discoloured bachelor who lived 
in ‘rooms’ on two pounds a week and came to the library to study books on 
yachting by the hour together It had been a great relief to her when the term 
ended, but this feeling soon wore off, indeed, with never a soul to talk to, the 
days dragged even more heavily than before There is perhaps no quarter of 
the inhabited world where one can be quite so completely alone as m the 
London suburbs In a big town the throng and bustle give one at least the 
illusion of companionship, and in the country everyone is interested m 
everyone else-too much so, indeed But in places like Southbndge, if you have 
no family and no home to call your own, you could spend half a lifetime 
without managing to make a friend. There are women m such places, and 
especially derelict gentlewomen m ill-paid jobs, who go for years upon end m 
almost utter solitude It was not long before Dorothy found herself m a 
perpetually low-spirited, jaded state m which, try as she would, nothing 
seemed able to interest her And it was in the hateful ennui of this time-the 
corrupting ennui that lies in wait for every modem soul- that she first came to a 
full understanding of what it meant to have lost her faith 

She tried drugging herself with books, and it succeeded for a week or so But 
after a while very nearly all books seemed wearisome and unintelligible; for the 
mind will not work to any purpose when it is quite alone In the end she found 
that she could not cope with anything more difficult than a detective story She 
took walks of ten and fifteen miles, trying to tire herself into a better mood, but 
the mean suburban roads, and the damp, miry paths through the woods, the 
naked trees, the sodden moss and great spongy fungi, afflicted her with a 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 403 

deadly melancholy It was human companionship that she needed, and there 
seemed no way of getting it At nights when she walked back to the school and 
looked at the warm-lit windows of the houses, and heard voices laughing and 
gramophones playing within, her heart swelled with envy Ah, to be like those 
people in there-to have at least a home, a family, a few friends who were 
interested in you 1 There were days when she pined for the courage to speak to 
strangers m the street Days, too, when she contemplated shamming piety m 
order to scrape acquaintance with the Vicar of St George’s and his family, and 
perhaps get the chance of occupying herself with a little parish work, days, 
even, when she was so desperate that she thought of joining the YWCA 

But almost at the end of the holidays, through a chance encounter at the 
library, she made friends with a little woman named Miss Beaver, who was 
geography mistress at Toot’s Commercial College, another of the private 
schools in Southbridge Toot’s Commerical College was a much larger and 
more pretentious school than Ringwood House-it had about a hundred and 
fifty day-pupils of both sexes and even rose to the dignity of having a dozen 
boarders-and its curriculum was a somewhat less blatant swindle It was one 
of those schools that are aimed at the type of parent who blathers about ‘up-to- 
date business training’, and its watch-word was Efficiency, meaning a 
tremendous parade of hustling, and the banishment of all humane studies One 
of its features was a kind of catechism called the Efficiency Ritual, which all the 
children were required to learn by heart as soon as they joined the school It 
had questions and answers such as 

Q What is the secret of success’ 

A The secret of success is efficiency 
Q What is the test of efficiency’ 

A The test of efficiency is success 

And so on and so on It was said that the spectacle of the whole school, boys 
and girls together, reciting the Efficiency Ritual under the leadership of the 
Headmaster-they had this ceremony two mornings a week instead of 
prayers-was most impressive 

Miss Beaver was a prim little woman with a round body, a thm face, a 
reddish nose, and the gait of a guinea-hen After twenty years of slave-driving 
she had attained to an income of four pounds a week and the privilege of ‘living 
out’ instead of having to put the boarders to bed at nights She lived in 
‘rooms’-that is, m a bed-sitting room-to Which she was sometimes able to 
invite Dorothy when both of them had a free evening How Dorothy looked 
forward to those visits' They were only possible at rare intervals, because Miss 
Beaver’s landlady ‘didn’t approve of visitors’, and even when you got there 
there was nothmg much to do except to help solve the crossword puzzle out of 
the Daily Telegraph and look at the photographs Miss Beaver had taken on her 
trip (this trip had been the summit and glory of her life) to the Austrian Tyrol 
in 1913 But still, how much it meant to sit talking to somebody in a friendly 
way and to drink a cup of tea less wishy-washy than Mrs Creevy’s' Miss 
Beaver had a spirit lamp in a japanned travelling case (it had been with her to 
the Tyrol in 1913) on which she brewed herself pots of tea as black as coal-tar. 



404 A Clergyman’ s Daughter 

swallowing about a bucketful of this stuff during the day She confided to 
Dorothy that she always took a Thermos flask to school and had a nice hot cup 
of tea during the break and another after dinner Dorothy perceived that by 
one of two well-beaten roads every third-rate schoolmistress must travel Miss 
Strong’s road; via whisky to the workhouse, or Miss Beaver’s road, via strong 
tea to a decent death m the Home for Decayed Gentlewomen 

Miss Beaver was m truth a dull little woman She was a memento mon , or 
rather memento senescere , to Dorothy Her soul seemed to have withered until it 
was as forlorn as a dried-up cake of soap m a forgotten soap dish She had come 
to a point where life in a bed-sitting room under a tyrannous landlady and the 
‘efficient’ thrusting of Commercial Geography down children’s retching 
throats, were almost the only destiny she could imagine Yet Dorothy grew to 
be very fond of Miss Beaver, and those occasional hours that they spent 
together in the bed-sitting room, doing the Daily Telegraph crossword over a 
nice hot cup of tea, were like oases in her life 

She was glad when the Easter term began, for even the daily round of slave- 
driving was better than the empty solitude of the holidays Moreover, the girls 
were much better m hand this term, she never again found it necessary to 
smack their heads For she had grasped now that it is easy enough to keep 
children m order if you are ruthless with them from the start Last term the 
girls had behaved badly, because she had started by treating them as human 
beings, and later on, when the lessons that interested them were discontinued, 
they had rebelled like human beings But if you are obliged to teach children 
rubbish, you mustn’t treat them as human beings You must treat them like 
ammals-driving, not persuading Before all else, you must teach them that it is 
more painful to rebel than to obey Possibly this kind of treatment is not very 
good for children, but there is no doubt they understand it and respond to it 

She learned the dismal arts of the school-teacher She learned to glaze her 
mind against the interminable boring hours, to economize her nervous energy, 
to be merciless and ever- vigilant, to take a kind of pride and pleasure in seeing 
a futile rigmarole well done She had grown, quite suddenly it seemed, much 
tougher and maturer Her eyes had lost the half-childish look that they had 
once had, and her face had grown thinner, making her nose seem longer At 
times it was quite definitely a schoolmarm’s face, you could imagine pince-nez 
upon it But she had not become cynical as yet She still knew that these 
children were the victims of a dreary swindle, still longed, if it had been 
possible, to do something better for them If she harried them and stuffed their 
heads with rubbish, it was for one reason alone because whatever happened 
she had got to keep her job 

There was very little noise in the schoolroom this term Mrs Creevy, 
anxious as she always was for a chance of finding fault, seldom had reason to 
rap on the wall with her broom-handle One morning at breakfast she looked 
rather hard at Dorothy, as though weighing a decision, and then pushed the 
dish of marmalade across the table 

‘Have some marmalade if you like, Miss MillbOrough,’ she said, quite 
graciously for her 



A Clergyman 1 s Daughter 405 

It was the first time that marmalade had crossed Dorothy's bps since she had 
come to Rmgwood House She flushed slightly ‘So the woman realizes that I 
have done my best for her,’ she could not help thinking 

Thereafter she had marmalade for breakfast every morning And m other 
ways Mrs Creevy’s manner became-not indeed, gemal, for it could never be 
that, but less brutally offensive There were even times when she produced a 
grimace that was intended for a smile, her face, it seemed to Dorothy, creased 
with the effort About this time her conversation became peppered with 
references to ‘next term’ It was always ‘Next term we’ll do this’, and ‘Next 
term I shall want you to do that’, until Dorothy began to feel that she had won 
Mrs Creevy’s confidence and was being treated more like a colleague than a 
slave At that a small, unreasonable but very exciting hope took root m her 
heart Perhaps Mrs Creevy was going to raise her wages' It was profoundly 
unlikely, and she tried to break herself of hoping for it, but could not quite 
succeed If her wages were raised even half a crown a week, what a difference it 
would make' 

The last day came With any luck Mrs Creevy might pay her wages 
tomorrow, Dorothy thought She wanted the money very badly indeed, she 
had been penniless for weeks past, and was not only unbearably hungry, but 
also m need of some new stockings, for she had not a pair that were not darned 
almost out of existence The following morning she did the household jobs 
allotted to her, and then, instead of going out, waited in the ‘morning-room’ 
while Mrs Creevy banged about with her broom and pan upstairs Presently 
Mrs Creevy came down 

‘Ah, so there you are. Miss Millborough 1 ’ she said m a peculiar meaning 
tone ‘I had a sort of an idea you wouldn’t be m such a hurry to get out of doors 
this morning Well, as you are here, I suppose I may as well pay you your 
wages ’ 

‘Thank you,’ said Dorothy 

‘And after that,’ added Mrs Creevy, ‘I’ve got a little something as I want to 
say to you ’ 

Dorothy’s heart stirred Did that ‘little something’ mean the longed-for rise 
m wages ^ It was just conceivable Mrs Creevy produced a worn, bulgy leather 
purse from a locked drawer m the dresser, opened it and licked her thumb 

‘Twelve weeks and five days,’ she said ‘Twelve weeks is near enough No 
need to be particular to a day That makes six pounds ’ 

She counted out five dingy pound notes and two ten-shilling notes; then, 
examining one of the notes and apparently finding it too clean, she put it back 
into her purse and fished out another that had been torn in half She went to 
the dresser, got a piece of transparent sticky paper and carefully stuck the two 
halves together Then she handed it, together with the other six, to Dorothy 

‘There you are, Miss Millborough,’ she said ‘And now, will you just leave 
the house at once, pleased I shan’t be wanting you any longer ’ 

‘You won’t be-’ 

Dorothy’s entrails seemed to have turned to ice All the blood drained out of 
her face But even now, in her terror and despair, she was not absolutely sure of 



^o5 A Clergyman's Daughter 

the meaning of what had been said to her She still half thought that Mrs 
Creevy merely meant that she was to stay out of the house for the rest of the 
day 

‘You won’t be wanting me any longer?’ she repeated faintly 

‘No I’m getting m another teacher at the beginning of next term And it 
isn’t to be expected as I’d keep you through the holidays all free for nothings is 
it?’ 

‘But you don’t mean that you want me to leave - that you’re dismissing me?’ 

‘Of course I do What else did you think I meant?’ 

‘But you’ve given me no notice 1 ’ said Dorothy 

‘Notice 1 ’ said Mrs Creevys getting angry immediately ‘What’s it got to do 
withyoM whether I give you notice or not? You haven’t got a written contracts 
have you?’ 

‘No I suppose not ’ 

‘Well, then' You’d better go upstairs and start packing your box It’s no 
good your staying any longer, because I haven’t got anything m for your 
dinner ’ 

Dorothy went upstairs and sat down on the side of the bed She was 
trembling uncontrollably, and it was some minutes before she could collect her 
wits and begin packing She felt dazed The disaster that had fallen upon her 
was so sudden, so apparently causeless, that she had difficulty in believing that 
it had actually happened But m truth the reason why Mrs Creevy had sacked 
her was quite simple and adequate 

Not far from Rmgwood House there was a poor, moribund little school 
called The Gables, with only seven pupils The teacher was an incompetent 
old hack called Miss Allcock, who had been at thirty-eight different schools m 
her life and was not fit to have charge of a tame canary But Miss Allcock had 
one outstanding talent, she was very good at double-crossing her employers 
In these third-rate and fourth-rate private schools a sort of piracy is constantly 
gomg on Parents are ‘got round’ and pupils stolen from one school to another 
Very often the treachery of the teacher is at the bottom of it. The teacher 
secretly approaches the parents one by one (‘Send your child to me and I’ll 
take her at ten shillings a term cheaper’), and when she has corrupted a 
sufficient number she suddenly deserts and ‘sets up’ on her own, or carries the 
children off to another school Miss Allcock had succeeded m stealing three 
out of her employer’s seven pupils, and had come to Mrs Creevy with the offer 
of them In return, she was to have Dorothy’s place and a fifteen-per-cent 
commission on the pupils she brought 

There were weeks of furtive chaffering before the bargain was clinched, 
Miss Allcock being finally beaten down from fifteen per cent to twelve and a 
half Mrs Creevy privately resolved to sack old Allcock the instant she was 
certain, that the three children she brought with her would stay 
Simultaneously, Miss Allcock was planning to begin stealing old Creevy’s 
pupils as soon as she had got a footing in the school. 

Having decided to sack Dorothy, it was obviously most important to prevent 
her from finding it out For, of course, if she knew what was going to happen, 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 407 

she would begin stealing pupils on her own account, or at any rate wouldn’t do 
a stroke of work for the rest of the term (Mrs Creevy prided herself on 
knowing human nature ) Hence the marmalade, the creaky smiles, and the 
other ruses to allay Dorothy’s suspicions Anyone who knew the ropes would 
have begun thinking of another job the very moment when the dish of 
marmalade was pushed across the table 

Just half an hour after her sentence of dismissal, Dorothy, carrying her 
handbag, opened the front gate It was the fourth of April, a bright blowy day, 
too cold to stand about m, with a sky as blue as a hedgesparrow’s egg, and one 
of those spiteful spring winds that come tearing along the pavement m sudden 
gusts and blow dry, stinging dust into your face Dorothy shut the gate behind 
her and began to walk very slowly m the direction of the mam-lme station 
She had told Mrs Creevy that she would give her an address to which her 
box could be sent, and Mrs Creevy had instantly exacted five shillings for the 
carriage So Dorothy had five pounds fifteen in hand, which might keep her for 
three weeks with careful economy What she was going to do, except that she 
must start by going to London and finding a suitable lodging, she had very 
little idea But her first panic had worn off, and she realized that the situation 
was not altogether desperate No doubt her father would help her, at any rate 
for a while, and at the worst, though she hated even the thought of doing it, she 
could ask her cousin’s help a second time Besides, her chances of finding a job 
were probably fairly good She was young, she spoke with a genteel accent, and 
she was willing to drudge for a servant’s wages-qualities that are much sought 
after by the proprietors of fourth-rate schools Very likely all would be well 
But that there was an evil time ahead of her, a time of job-huntmg, of 
uncertainty and possibly of hunger-that, at any rate, was certain 


CHAPTER 5 


However, it turned out quite otherwise For Dorothy had not gone five yards 
from the gate when a telegraph boy came riding up the street in the opposite 
direction, whistling and looking at the names of the houses, He saw the name 
Rmgwood House, wheeled his bicycle round, propped it against the kerb, and 
accosted Dorothy 

‘Miss Mill-burrow live ’ere^’ he said, jerking his head m the direction of 
Rmgwood House 

‘Yes lam Miss Millborough ’ 

‘Gotter wait case there’s a answer,’ said the boy, taking an orange-coloured 
envelope from his belt 

Dorothy put down her bag She had once more begun trembling violently. 
And whether this was from joy or fear she was not certain, for two conflicting 



408 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

thoughts had sprung almost simultaneously into her brain One, ‘This is some 
kind of good news’’ The other, ‘Father is seriously ill’’ She managed to tear the 
envelope open, and found a telegram which occupied two pages, and which she 
had the greatest difficulty in understanding It ran 

Rejoice in the lord o ye righteous note of exclamation great news note of exclamation your 
reputation absolutely reestablished stop mrs sempnll fallen into the pit that she hath digged stop 
action for libel stop no one believes her any longer stop your father wishes you return home 
immediately stop am coming up to town myself comma will pick you up if you like stop arriving 
shortly after this stop wait for me stop praise him with the loud cymbals note of exclamation much 
love stop 

No need to look at the signature It was from Mr Warburton, of course 
Dorothy felt weaker and more tremulous than ever She was dimly aware the 
telegraph boy was asking her something 
‘Any answer?’ he said for the third or fourth time 
‘Not today, thank you,’ said Dorothy vaguely 

The boy remounted his bicycle and rode off, whistling with extra loudness 
to show Dorothy how much he despised her for not tipping him But Dorothy 
was unaware of the telegraph’s boy’s scorn The only phrase of the telegram 
that she had fully understood was ‘your father wishes you return home 
immediately’, and the surprise of it had left her m a semi-dazed condition For 
some indefinite time she stood on the pavement, until presently a taxi rolled up 
the street, with Mr Warburton inside it He saw Dorothy, stopped the taxi, 
jumped out and came across to meet her, beaming He seized her both hands 
‘Hullo’’ he cried, and at once threw his arm pseudo-paternally about her and 
drew her against him, heedless of who might be looking ‘How are you'* But by 
Jove, how thm you’ve got’ I can feel all your ribs Where is this school of 
yours?’ 

Dorothy, who had not yet managed to get free of his arm, turned partly 
round and cast a glance towards the dark windows of Rmgwood House 
‘What’ That place? Good God, what a hole’ What have you done with your 
luggage? 5 . * 

‘It’s inside I’ve left them the money to send it on. I thip^||ffl be all right ’ 
‘Oh, nonsense' Why pay? We’ll take it with us It can go on top of the taxi ’ 
‘No, no' Let them send it, I daren’t go back Mrs Creevy would be horribly 
angry ’ 

‘Mrs Creevy? Who’s Mrs Creevy?’ 

‘The headmistress-at least, she owns the school ’ 

‘What, a dragon, is she? Leave her to me- I’ll deal with her Perseus and the 
Gorgon, what? You are Andromeda Hi!’ he called to the taxi-driver 
The two of them went up to the front door and Mr Warburton knocked 
Somehow, Dorothy never believed that they would succeed m getting her box 
from Mrs Creevy. In fact, she half expected to see them come out flying for 
their lives, and Mrs Creevy after them with her broom However, in a couple 
of minutes they reappeared, the taxi-driver carrying the box on his shoulder 
Mr Warburton handed Dorothy into the taxi and, as they sat down, dropped 
half af crown into her hand 



A Clergyman's Daughter 409 

‘What a woman 1 What a woman’’ he said comprehensively as the taxi bore 
them away ‘How the devil have you put up with it all this time?’ 

‘What is this?’ said Dorothy, looking at the com 

‘Your half-crown that you left to pay for the luggage Rather a feat getting it 
out of the old girl, wasn’t it?’ 

‘But I left five shillings’’ said Dorothy 

‘What’ The woman told me you only left half a crown By God, what 
impudence’ We’ll go back and have the half-crown out of her Just to spite 
her’’ He tapped on the glass 

‘No, no’’ said Dorothy, laying her hand on his arm ‘It doesn’t matter in the 
least Let’s get away from here-nght away I couldn’t bear to go back to that 
place agai n-eveA' 

It was quite true She felt that she would sacrifice not merely half a crown, 
but all the money in her possession, sooner than set eyes on Rmgwood House 
again So they drove on, leaving Mrs Creevy victorious It would be 
interesting to know whether this was another of the occasions when Mrs 
Creevy laughed 

Mr Warburton insisted on taking the taxi the whole way into London, and 
talked so voluminously in the quieter patches of the traffic that Dorothy could 
hardly get a word in edgeways It was not till they had reached the inner 
suburbs that she got from him an explanation of the sudden change m her 
fortunes 

‘Tell me,’ she said, ‘what is it that’s happened? I don’t understand Why is it 
all right for me to go home all of a sudden? Why don’t people believe Mrs 
Semprill any longer? Surely she hasn’t confessed?’ 

‘Confessed? Not she’ But her sins have found her out, all the same It was 
the kind of thing that you pious people would ascribe to the finger of 
Providence Cast thy bread upon the waters, and all that She got herself into a 
nasty mess-an action for libel We’ve talked of nothing else in Knype Hill for 
the last fortnight I though you would have seen somethmg about it in the 
newspapers ’ 

‘I’ve hardly looked at a paper for ages Who brought an action for libel? Not 
my father, surely?’ 

‘Good gracious, no’ Clergymen can’t bring actions for libel It was the bank 
manager Do you remember her favourite story about him-how he was 
keeping a woman on the bank’s money, and so forth?’ 

‘Yes, I think so ’ 

‘A few months ago she was foolish enough to put some of it m wntmg. Some 
kind friend-some female friend, I presume-took the letter round to the bank 
manager He brought an action-Mrs Semprill was ordered to pay a hundred 
and fifty pounds damages I don’t suppose she paid a halfpenny, but still, 
that’s the end of her career as a scandalmonger. You can go on blackening 
people’s reputations for years, and everyone will believe you, more or less, 
even when it?s perfectly obvious that you’re lying But once you’ve been 
proved a liar in open cour% ymi’se disqualified* so to speak, Mrs SemprUlts 
done for, so far aaKnyffe Hill goes. She left thetown betweendays-practically 



qio A Clergyman's Daughter 

did a moonlight flit, m fact I believe she’s inflicting herself on Bury St 
Edmunds at present ’ 

‘But what has all that got to do with the things she said about you and me?’ 

‘Nothing-nothing whatever But why worry? The point is that you’re 
reinstated, and all the hags who’ve been smacking their chops over you for 
months past are saying, “Poor, poor Dorothy, how shockingly that dreadful 
woman has treated her 1 ”’ 

‘You mean they think that because Mrs Sempnll was telling lies m one case 
she must have been telling lies m another?’ 

‘No doubt that’s what they’d say if they were capable of reasoning it out At 
any rate, Mrs Sempnll’s m disgrace, and so all the people she’s slandered must 
be martyrs Even my reputation is practically spotless for the time being ’ 

‘And do you think that’s really the end of it? Do you think they honestly 
believe that it was all an accident-that I only lost my memory and didn’t elope 
with anybody?’ 

‘Oh, well, I wouldn’t go as far as that In these country places there’s always 
a certain amount of suspicion knocking about Not suspicion of anything in 
particular, you know, just generalized suspicion A sort of instinctive rustic 
dirty-mindedness I can imagine its being vaguely rumoured m the bar parlour 
of the Dog and Bottle in ten years’ time that you’ve got some nasty secret m 
your past, only nobody can remember what Still, your troubles are over If I 
were you I wouldn’t give any explanations till you’re asked for them The 
official theory is that you had a bad attack of flu and went away to recuperate I 
should stick to that You’ll find they’ll accept it all right Officially, there’s 
nothing against you ’ 

Presently they got to London, and Mr Warburton took Dorothy to lunch at 
a restaurant in Coventry Street, where they had a young chicken, roasted, with 
asparagus and tiny, pearly- white potatoes that had been ripped untimely from 
their mother earth, and also treacle tart and a nice warm bottle of Burgundy, 
but what gave Dorothy the most pleasure of all, after Mrs Creevy’s lukewarm 
water tea, was the black coffee they had afterwards After lunch they took 
another taxi to Liverpool Street Station and caught the 2 45 It was a four- 
hour journey to Knype Hill 

Mr Warburton insisted on travelling first-class, and would not hear of 
Dorothy paying her own fare, he also, when Dorothy was not looking, tipped 
the guard to let them have a carnage to themselves It was one of those bright 
cold days which are spring or winter according as you are indoors or out From 
behind the shut windows of the carnage the too-blue sky looked warm and 
kind, and all the slummy wilderness through which the tram was ratthng-the 
labyrinths of little dingy-coloured houses, the great chaotic factories, the miry 
canals, and derelict bmlding lots littered with rusty boilers and overgrown by 
smoke-blackened weeds-all were redeemed and gilded by the sun Dorothy 
hardly spoke for the first half-hour of the journey For the moment -she was too 
happy to talk She did not even think of anything in particular, but merely sat 
there luxuriating in the glass-filtered sunlight, m the comfort of the padded 
seat and the feeling of having escaped from Mrs Creevy’s clutches But she was 



A Clergyman's Daughter 41 j 

aware that this mood could not last very much longer Her contentment, like 
the warmth of the wme that she had drunk at lunch, was ebbing away, and 
thoughts either painful or difficult to express were taking shape m her mind 
Mr Warburton had been watching her face, more observantly than was usual 
for him, as though trying to gauge the changes that the past eight months had 
worked m her 

‘You look older,’ he said finally 

‘I am older,’ said Dorothy 

‘Yes, but you look- well, more completely grown up Tougher Something 
has changed m your face You look-if you’ll forgive the expression-as though 
the Girl Guide had been exorcized from you for good and all I hope seven 
devils haven’t entered into you instead’’ Dorothy did not answer, and he 
added ‘I suppose, as a matter of fact, you must have had the very devil of a 
time’’ 

‘Oh, beastly' Sometimes too beastly for words Do you know that 
sometimes-’ 

She paused She had been about to tell him how she had had to beg for her 
food, how she had slept in the streets, how she had been arrested for beggmg 
and spent a mght in the police cells, how Mrs Creevy had nagged at her and 
starved her But she stopped, because she had suddenly realized that these 
were not the things that she wanted to talk about Such things as these, she 
perceived, are of no real importance, they are mere irrelevant accidents, not 
essentially different from catching a cold in the head or having to wait two 
hours at a railway junction They are disagreeable, but they do not matter The 
truism that all real happenings are in the mind struck her more forcibly than 
ever before, and she said 

‘Those things don’t really matter I mean, things like having no money and 
not having enough to eat Even when you’re practically starvmg-it doesn’t 
change anything inside you ’ 

‘Doesn’t it’ I’ll take your word for it I should be very sorry to try ’ 

‘Oh, well, it’s beastly while it’s happening, of course, but it doesn’t make any 
real difference, it’s the things that happen inside you that matter ’ 

‘Meaning’’ said Mr Warburton 

‘Oh— things change m your mind And then the whole world changes, 
because you look at it differently ’ 

She was still looking out of the window The tram had drawn clear of the 
eastern slums and was running at gathering speed past willow-bordered 
streams and low-lying meadows upon whose hedges the first buds made a faint 
soft greenness, like a cloud In a field near the line a month-old calf, flat as a 
Noah’s Ark animal, was bounding stiff-legged after its mother, and in a cottage 
garden an old labourer, with slow, rheumatic movements, was turning over the 
soil beneath a pear tree covered with ghostly bloom His spade flashed in the 
sun as the train passed. The depressing hymn-line ‘Change and decay in ail 
arouhd I see’ moved through Dorothy’s mind It was true what she had said 
just now Somethin# had happened m her heart, and the world was a little 
emptier, a little poorer from that minute. On such a day as this, last spring or 



412 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

any earlier spring, how joyfully, and how unthinkingly, she would have 
thanked God for the first blue skies and the first flowers of the reviving year 1 
And now, seemingly, there was no God to thank, and nothmg-not a flower or a 
stone or a blade of grass-nothing m the universe would ever be the same again 
‘Things change m your mind,’ she repeated ‘I’ve lost my faith,’ she added, 
somewhat abruptly, because she found herself half ashamed to utter the words 
‘You’ve lost your zuhaD’ said Mr Warburton, less accustomed than she to 
this kind of phraseology 

‘My faith Oh, you know what I mean 1 A few months ago, all of a sudden, it 
seemed as if my whole mmd had changed Everything that I’d believed m till 
then-everythmg-seemed suddenly meaningless and almost silly God-what 
I’d meant by God-immortal life. Heaven and Hell-everything It had all 
gone And it wasn’t that I’d reasoned it out, it just happened to me It was like 
when you’re a child, and one day, for no particular reason, you stop believing 
m fairies I just couldn’t go on believing m it any longer ’ 

‘You never did believe in it,’ said Mr Warburton unconcernedly 
‘But I did, really I did* I know you always thought I didn’t-you thought I 
was just pretending because I was ashamed to own up But it wasn’t that at all 
I believed it just as I believe that I’m sitting in this carriage ’ 

‘Of course you didn’t, my poor child* How could you, at your age? You were 
far too intelligent for that But you’d been brought up in these absurd beliefs, 
and you’d allowed yourself to go on thinking, m a sort of way, that you could 
still swallow them You’d built yourself a life-pattern-if you’ll excuse a bit of 
psychological jargon-that was only possible for a believer, and naturally it was 
beginning to be a strain on you In fact, it was obvious all the time what was the 
matter with you I should say that in all probability that was why you lost your 
memory ’ 

‘What do you mean?’ she said, rather puzzled by this remark 
He saw that she did not understand, and explained to her that loss of 
memory is only a device, unconsciously used, to escape from an impossible 
situation The mmd, he said, will play curious tricks when it is in a tight 
comer Dorothy had never heard of anything of this kind before, and she could 
not at first accept his explanation Nevertheless she considered it for a 
moment, and perceived that, even if it were true, it did not alter the 
fundamental fact 

‘I don’t see that it makes any difference,’ she said finally 
‘Doesn’t it? I should have said it made a considerable difference ’ 

‘But don’t you see, if my faith is gone, what does it matter whether I’ve only 
lost it now or whether I’d really lost it years ago? All that matters is that it’s 
gone, and I’ve got to begin my life all over again ’ 

‘Surely I don’t take you to mean,’ said Mr Warburton, ‘that you actually 
regret losmg your faith, as you call it? One might as well regret losmg a goitre 
Mmd you, I’m speaking, as it were, without the book-as a man who never had 
very much faith to lose The little I had passed away quite painlessly at the age 
of nine But it’s hardly the kind of thing I should have thought anyone would 
regret losing Used you not, if I remember rightly, to do horrible things like 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 413 

getting up at five in the morning to go to Holy Communion on an empty belly’ 
Surely you’re not homesick for that kind of thing’ 5 
‘I don’t believe m it any longer, if that’s what you mean And I see now that a 
lot of it was rather silly But that doesn’t help The point is that all the beliefs I 
had are gone, and I’ve nothing to put in their place ’ 

‘But good God r why do you want to put anything in their place’ You’ve got 
rid of a load of superstitious rubbish, and you ought to be glad of it Surely it 
doesn’t make you any happier to go about quaking in fear of Hell fire’’ 

‘But don’t you see-you must see-how different everything is when all of a 
sudden the whole world is empty’’ 

‘Empty’’ exclaimed Mr Warburton ‘What do you mean by saying it’s 
empty’ I call that perfectly scandalous in a girl of your age It’s not empty at 
all, it’s a deuced sight too full, that’s the trouble with it We’re here today and 
gone tomorrow, and we’ve no time to enjoy what we’ve got ’ 

‘But how can one enjoy anything when all the meaning’s been taken out of 

it’’ 

‘Good gracious 1 What do you want with a meaning’ When I eat my dinner I 
don’t do it to the greater glory of God, I do it because I enjoy it The world’s 
full of amusing things-books, pictures, wine, travel, fnends-everything I’ve 
never seen any meaning m it all, and I don’t want to see one Why not take life 
as you find it’’ 

‘But-’ 

She broke off, for she saw already that she was wasting words m trying to 
make herself clear to him He was quite incapable of understanding her 
difficulty-incapable of realizing how a mind naturally pious must recoil from a 
world discovered to be meaningless Even the loathsome platitudes of the 
pantheists would be beyond his understanding Probably the idea that life was 
essentially futile, if he thought of it at all, struck him as rather amusing than 
otherwise And yet with all this he was sufficiently acute He could see the 
difficulty of her own particular position, and he adverted to it a moment later 
‘Of course,’ he said, ‘I can see that things are going to be a little awkward for 
you when you get home You’re going to be, so to speak, a wolf m sheep’s 
clothing Parish work-Mothers’ Meetings, prayers with the dying, and all 
that-I suppose it might be a little distasteful at times Are you afraid you won’t 
be able to keep it up-is that the trouble’’ 

‘Oh, no I wasn’t thinking of that I shall go on with it, just the same as 
before It’s what I’m most used to Besides, Father needs my help He can’t 
afford a curate, and the work’s got to be done ’ 

‘Then what’s the matter? Is it the hypocrisy that’s worrying you’ Afraid that 
the consecrated bread might stick in your throat, and so forth’ I shouldn’t 
trouble Half the parsons’ daughters in England are probably m the same 
difficulty And quite nine-tenths of the parsons, I should say*’ 

‘It’s partly that I shall have t<?be always pretending- oh, you can’t imagine 
in what ways 1 But that’s not the worst Perhaps that part of it doesn’t matter, 
really Perhaps it’s better to be a hypocrite- z/wt kind of hypocnte-than some 
things,’ 



4/4 A Clergyman's Daughter 

‘Why do you say that kind of hypocrite? I hope you don’t mean that 
pretending to believe is the next best thing to believing?’ 

‘Yes I suppose that’s what I do mean Perhaps it’s better-less selfish-to 
pretend one believes even when one doesn’t, than to say openly that one’s an 
unbeliever and perhaps help turn other people into unbelievers too ’ 

‘My dear Dorothy,’ said Mr Warburton, ‘your mind, if you’ll excuse my 
saying so, is m a morbid condition No, dash it 1 it’s worse than morbid, it’s 
downright septic You’ve a sort of mental gangrene hanging over from your 
Christian upbringing You tell me that you’ve got rid of these ridiculous 
beliefs that were stuffed into you from your cradle upwards, and yet you’re 
taking an attitude to life which is simply meaningless without those beliefs Do 
you call that reasonable?’ 

‘I don’t know No perhaps it’s not But I suppose it’s what comes naturally 
to me ’ 

‘What you’re trying to do, apparently,’ pursued Mr Warburton, ‘is to make 
the worst of both worlds You stick to the Christian scheme of things, but you 
leave Paradise out of it And I suppose, if the truth were known, there are quite 
a lot of your kind wandering about among the rums of C of E You’re 
practically a sect m yourselves,’ he added reflectively ‘the Anglican Atheists. 
Not a sect I should care to belong to, I must say ’ 

They talked for a little while longer, but not to much purpose In reality the 
whole subject of religious belief and religious doubt was boring and 
incomprehensible to Mr Warburton Its only appeal to him was as a pretext for 
blasphemy Presently he changed the subject, as though giving up the attempt 
to understand Dorothy’s outlook 

‘This is nonsense that we’re talking,’ he said ‘You’ve got hold of some very 
depressmg ideas, but you’ll grow out of them later on, you know Christianity 
isn’t really an incurable disease However, there was something quite different 
that I was going to say to you I want you to listen to me for a moment You’re 
coming home, after being away eight months, to what I expect you realize is a 
rather uncomfortable situation. You had a hard enough life before-at least, 
what I should call a hard life- and now that you aren’t quite suqh a good Girl 
Guide as you used to be, it’s going to be a great deal harder Now, do you thmk 
it’s absolutely necessary to go back to it?’ 

‘But I don’t see what else I can do, unless I could get another job I’ve really 
no alternative ’ 

Mr Warburton, with his head cocked a little on one side, gave Dorothy a 
rather curious look 

‘As a matter of fact,’ he said, in a more serious tone than usual, ‘there’s at 
least one other alternative that I could suggest to you ’ 

‘You mean that I could go on being a schoolmistress? Perhaps that’s what I 
ought to do, really. I shall come back to it in the end, m any case ’ 

‘No. I don’t think that’s what I should advise ’ 

All this time Mr Warburton, unwilling as ever to expose his baldness, had 
been wearing his rakish, rather broad-brimmed grey felt hat Now, however, 
he took it off and laid it carefully on the empty seat beside him His naked 



A Clergyman's Daughter 41$ 

cranium, with only a wisp or two of golden hair lingering in the 
neighbourhood of the ears, looked like some monstrous pink pearl Dorothy 
watched him with a slight surprise 

‘I am taking my hat off,’ he said, £ in order to let you see me at my very worst 
You will understand why m a moment Now, let me offer you another 
alternative besides going back to your Girl Guides and your Mothers’ Union, 
or imprisoning yourself in some dungeon of a girls’ school ’ 

‘What do you mean 5 *’ said Dorothy 

‘I mean, will you-think well before you answer, I admit there are some very 
obvious objections, but-will you marry me 5 ’ 

Dorothy’s lips parted with surprise Perhaps she turned a little paler With a 
hasty, almost unconscious recoil she moved as far away from him as the back of 
the seat would allow But he had made no movement towards her He said with 
complete equanimity 

‘You know, of course, that Dolores [Dolores was Mr Warburton’s ex- 
mistress] left me a year ago 5 *’ 

‘But I can’t, I can’t f ’ exclaimed Dorothy ‘You know I can’t 1 I’m not-like 
that I thought you always knew I shan’t ever marry ’ 

Mr Warburton ignored this remark 

‘I grant you,’ he said, still with exemplary calmness, ‘that I don’t exactly 
come under the heading of eligible young men I am somewhat older than you 
We both seem to be putting our cards on the table today, so I’ll let you into a 
great secret and tell you that my age is forty-nine And then I’ve three children 
and a bad reputation It’s a marriage that your father would- well, regard with 
disfavour And my income is only seven hundred a year But still, don’t you 
think it’s worth considering 1 ’ 

‘I can’t, you know why I can’t 1 ’ repeated Dorothy 

She took it for granted that he ‘knew why she couldn’t’, though she had 
never explained to him, or to anyone else, why it was impossible for her to 
marry Very probably, even if she had explained, he would not have 
understood her He went on speaking, not appearing to notice what she had 
said 

‘Let me put it to you’, he said, ‘in the form of a bargain Of course, I needn’t 
tell you that it’s a great deal more than that I’m not a marrying kind of man, as 
the saying goes, and I shouldn’t ask you to marry me if you hadn’t a rather 
special attraction for me But let me put the business side of it first. You need a 
home and a livelihood, I need a wife to keep me m order I’m sick of these 
disgusting women I’ve spent my life with, if you’ll forgive my mentioning 
them, and I’m rather anxious to settle down A bit late m the day, perhaps, but 
better late than never Besides, I need somebody to look after the children, the 
bastards , you know I don’t expect you to find me overwhelmingly attractive,’ 
he added, running a hand reflectively over his bald crown, ‘but on the other 
hand I am very easy to get on wifh Immoral people usually are, as a matter of 
fact And from your own point of view the scheme would have certain 
advantages Why should you spend your life delivering parish magazines and 
rubbing nastly old women’s legs with Elliman’s embrocation 5 * You would be 



416 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

happier married, even to a husband with a bald head and a clouded past 
You’ve had a hard, dull life for a girl of your age, and your future isn’t exactly 
rosy Have you really considered what your future will be like if you don’t 
marry?’ 

‘I don’t know I have to some extent,’ she said 

As he had not attempted to lay hands on her or to offer any endearments, she 
answered his question without repeating her previous refusal He looked out of 
the window, and went on m a musing voice, much quieter than his normal 
tone, so that at first she could barely hear him above the rattle of the train, but 
presently his voice rose, and took on a note of seriousness that she had never 
heard in it before, or even imagined that it could hold 

‘Consider what your future would be like,’ he repeated ‘It’s the same future 
that lies before any woman of your class with no husband and no money Let us 
say your father will live another ten years By the end of that time the last 
penny of his money will have gone down the sink The desire to squander it 
will keep him alive just as long as it lasts, and probably no longer All that time 
he will be growing more senile, more tiresome, more impossible to live with, 
he will tyrannize over you more and more, keep you shorter and shorter of 
money, make more and more trouble for you with the neighbours and the 
tradesmen And you will go on with that slavish, worrying life that you have 
lived, struggling to make both ends meet, drilling the Girl Guides, reading 
novels to the Mothers’ Union, polishing the altar brasses, cadging money for 
the organ fund, making brown paper jackboots for the schoolchildren’s plays, 
keeping your end up m the vile little feuds and scandals of the church hen- 
coop Year after year, winter and summer, you will bicycle from one reeking 
cottage to another, to dole out pennies from the poor box and repeat prayers 
that you don’t even believe in any longer You will sit through interminable 
church services which in the end will make you physically sick with their 
sameness and futility Every year your life will be a little bleaker, a little fuller 
of those deadly little jobs that are shoved off on to lonely women And 
remember that you won’t always be twenty-eight All the while you will be 
fading, withering, until one mormng you will look m the glass and realize that 
you aren’t a girl any longer, only a skinny old maid. You’ll fight against it, of 
course You’ll keep your physical energy and your girlish mannensms-you’ll 
keep them just a little bit too long Do you know that type of bnght-too 
bright-spmster who says “topping” and “ripping” and “nght-ho”, and 
prides herself on being such a good sport, and she’s such a good sport that she 
makes everyone feel a little unwelP And she’s so splendidly hearty at tennis 
and so handy at amateur theatricals, and she throws herself with a kind of 
desperation into her Girl Guide work and her parish visiting, and she’s the life 
and soul of Church socials, and always, year after year, she thinks of herself as a 
young girl still and never realizes that behind her back everyone laughs at her 
for a poor, disappointed old maid? That’s what you’ll become, what you must 
become, however much you foresee it and try to avoid it There’s no other 
future possible to you unless you marry Women who don’t marry wither 
up-r-they wither up like aspidistras in back-parlour windows; and the devilish 



A Clergyman's Daughter 417 

thing is that they don’t even know that they’re withering ’ 

Dorothy sat silent and listening with intent and horrified fascination She 
did not even notice that he had stood up, with one hand on the door to steady 
him against the swaying of the train She was as though hypnotized, not so 
much by his voice as by the visions that his words had evoked m her He had 
described her life, as it must inevitably be, with such dreadful fidelity that he 
seemed actually to have carried her ten years onward into the menacmg future, 
and she felt herself no longer a girl full of youth and energy, but a desperate, 
worn virgm of thirty-eight As he went on he took her hand, which was lying 
idle on the arm of the seat, and even that she scarcely noticed 

‘After ten years,’ he continued, ‘your father will die, and he will leave you 
with not a penny, only debts You will be nearly forty, with no money, no 
profession, no chance of marrying, just a derelict parson’s daughter like the ten 
thousand others m England And after that, what do you suppose will become 
of you^ You will have to find yourself a job- the sort of job that parsons’ 
daughters get A nursery governess, for mstance, or companion to some 
diseased hag who will occupy herself in thinking of ways to humiliate you Or 
you will go back to school-teachmg, English mistress m some grisly girls’ 
school, seventy-five pounds a year and your keep, and a fortnight in a seaside 
boarding-house every August And all the time withering, drying up, growing 
more sour and more angular and more friendless And therefore-’ 

As he said ‘therefore’ he pulled Dorothy to her feet She made no resistance 
His voice had put her under a spell As her mind took m the prospect of that 
forbidding future, whose emptiness she was far more able to appreciate than 
he, such a despair had grown in her that if she had spoken at all it would have 
been to say, ‘Yes, I will marry you ’ He put his arm very gently about her and 
drew her a little towards him, and even now she did not attempt to resist Her 
eyes, half hypnotized, were fixed upon his When he put his arm about her it 
was as though he were protecting her, sheltering her, drawing her away from 
the brink of grey, deadly poverty and back to the world of friendly and 
desirable things-to security and ease, to comely houses and good clothes, to 
books and friends and flowers, to summer days and distant lands So for nearly 
a minute the fat, debauched bachelor and the thin, spmstensh girl stood face to 
face, their eyes meeting, their bodies all but touching, while the tram swayed 
them in its motion, and clouds and telegraph poles and bud-misted hedges and 
fields green with young wheat raced past unseen, 

Mr Warburton tightened his grip and pulled her against him It broke the 
spell The visions that had held her helpless-visions of poverty and of escape 
from poverty-suddenly vanished and left only a shocked realization of what 
was happening to her She was m the arms of a man-a fattish, oldish man' A" 
wave of disgust and deadly fear went through her, and her entrails seemed to 
shrink and freeze His thick male body was pressing her backwards and 
downwards, has large, pink facef smooth, but to her eyes old, was bearing down 
upon her own The harsh odour of maleness forced itself into her nostrils She 
recoiled. Furry thighs of satyrs! She began to struggle furiously^ though 
indeed he made hardly any effort to. retam her, and in a moment she had 



4i8 A Clergyman's Daughter 

wrenched herself free and fallen back into her seat, white and trembling She 
looked up at him with eyes which, from fear and aversion, were for a moment 
those of a stranger 

Mr Warburton remained on his feet, regarding her with an expression of 
resigned, almost amused disappointment He did not seem m the least 
distressed As her calmness returned to her she perceived that all he had said 
had been no more than a trick to play upon her feelings and cajole her into 
saying that she would marry him, and what was stranger yet, that he had said it 
without seriously caring whether she married him or not He had, m fact, 
merely been amusing himself Very probably the whole thing was only another 
of his periodical attempts to seduce her 
He sat down, but more deliberately than she, taking care of the creases of his 
trousers as he did so 

‘If you want to pull the communication cord,’ he said mildly, ‘you had better 
let me make sure that I have five pounds in my pocket-book * 

After that he was quite himself again, or as nearly himself as anyone could 
possibly be after such a scene, and he went on talking without the smallest 
symptom of embarrassment His sense of shame, if he had ever possessed one, 
had perished many years ago Perhaps it had been killed by overwork m a 
lifetime of squalid affairs with women 
For an hour, perhaps, Dorothy was ill at ease, but after that the tram reached 
Ipswich, where it stopped for a quarter of an hour, and there was the diversion 
of going to the refreshment room for a cup of tea For the last twenty miles of 
the journey they talked quite amicably Mr Warburton did not refer again to 
his proposal of marriage, but as the tram neared Knype Hill he returned, less 
seriously than before, to the question of Dorothy’s future 
‘So you really propose’, he said ‘to go back to your parish work? “The trivial 
round, the common task?” Mrs Pither’s rheumatism and Mrs Lewm’s corn- 
plaster and all the rest of it? The prospect doesn’t dismay you?’ 

‘I don’t know- sometimes it does But I expect it’ll be all right once I’m back 
at work I’ve got the habit, you see ’ 

‘And you really feel equal to years of calculated hypocrisy? For that’s what it 
amounts to, you know Not afraid of the cat getting out of the bag? Quite sure 
you won’t find yourself teaching the Sunday School kids to say the Lord’s 
Prayer backwards, or reading Gibbon’s fifteenth chapter to the Mothers’ 
Umon instead of Gene Stratton Porter?’ 

‘I don’t think so Because, you see, I do feel that that kind of work, even if it 
means saying prayers that one doesn’t believe m, and even if it means teaching 
children things that one doesn’t always think are true-I do feel that m a way 
it’s useful.’ 

‘Useful?’ said Air Warburton distastefully ‘You’re a little too fond of that 
depressing word “useful” Hypertrophy of the sense of duty- that’s what’s the 
matter with you Now, to me, it seems the merest common sense to have a bit 
of fun while the going’s good.’ 

‘That’s just hedonism,’ Dorothy objected 

‘M^ dear child, can you show me a philosophy of life that isn’t hedonism? 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 419 

Your verminous Christian samts are the biggest hedonists of all They’re out 
for an eternity of bliss, whereas we poor sinners don’t hope for more than a few 
years of it Ultimately we’re all trying for a bit of fun, but some people take it in 
such perverted forms Your notion of fun seems to be massaging Mrs Pither’s 
legs ’ 

‘It’s not that exactly, but-oh 1 somehow I can’t explain'’ 

What she would have said was that though her faith had left her, she had not 
changed, could not change, did not want to change, the spiritual background of 
her mind, that her cosmos, though now it seemed to her empty and 
meaningless, was still in a sense the Christian cosmos, that the Christian way of 
life was still the way that must come naturally to her But she could not put this 
into words, and felt that if she tried to do so he would probably begin making 
fun of her So she concluded lamely 

‘Somehow I feel that it’s better for me to go on as I was before ’ 

‘j Exactly the same as before? The whole bill of fare? The Girl Guides, the 
Mothers’ Umon, the Band of Hope, the Companionship of Marriage, parish 
visiting and Sunday School teaching. Holy Communion twice a week and here 
we go round the doxology-bush, chanting Gregorian plain-song? You’re quite 
certain you can manage it?’ 

Dorothy smiled m spite of herself ‘Not plain-song Father doesn’t like it ’ 
‘And you think that, except for your inner thoughts, your life will be 
precisely what it was before you lost your faith? There will be no change m 
your habits?’ 

Dorothy thought Yes, there would be changes m her habits, but most of 
them would be secret ones The memory of the disciplinary pin crossed her 
mind It had always been a secret from everyone except herself and she decided 
not to mention it 

‘Well,’ she said finally, ‘perhaps at Holy Communion I shall kneel down on 
Miss Mayfill’s right instead of on her left ’ 


2 


A week had gone by 

Dorothy rode up the hill from the town and wheeled her bicycle in at the 
Rectory gate It was a fine evening, clear and cold, and the sun, unclouded, was 
sinking in remote, greenish skies Dorothy noticed that the ash tree by the gate 
was m bloom, with clotted dark red blossoms that looked like festerings from a 
wound 

She was rather tired She had had a busy week of it, what with visiting all the 
women on her list in turn and trying to get the parish affairs into some kind of 
order again. Everything was in a fearful mess after her absence* The church 



420 A Clergyman's Daughter 

was dirty beyond all belief-in fact, Dorothy had had to spend the best part of a 
day cleaning up with scrubbing-brushes, broom and dustpan, and the beds of 
‘mouse dirts’ that she had found behind the organ made her wince when she 
thought of them (The reason why the mice came there was because Georgie 
Frew, the organ-blower, would bring penny packets of biscuits into church and 
eat them during the sermon ) All the Church associations had been neglected, 
with the result that the Band of Hope and the Companionship of Marriage had 
now given up the ghost, Sunday School attendance had dropped by half, and 
there was internecine warfare going on in the Mothers’ Union because of some 
tactless remark that Miss Foote had made The belfry was m a worse state than 
ever The parish magazine had not been delivered regularly and the money for 
it had not been collected None of the accounts of the Church Funds had been 
properly kept up, and there was nineteen shillings unaccounted for m all, and 
even the pansh registers were m a muddle-and so on and so on, ad infinitum 
The Rector had let everymg slide 

Dorothy had been up to her eyes m work from the moment of reaching 
home Indeed, things had slipped back into their old routine with astonishing 
swiftness. It was as though it had been only yesterday that she had gone away. 
Now that the scandal had blown over, her return to Knype Hill had aroused 
very little curiosity Some of the women on her visiting list, particularly Mrs 
Pither, were genmnely glad to see her back, and Victor Stone, perhaps, seemed 
just a little ashamed of havmg temporarily believed Mrs SemprilFs libel, but 
he soon forgot it in recounting to Dorothy his latest triumph in the Church 
Times Various of the coffee-ladies, of course, had stopped Dorothy in the 
street with ‘My dear, how very nice to see you back again’ You have been away 
a long time! And you know, dear, we all thought it such a shame when that 
horrible woman was going round telling those stories about you But I do hope 
you’ll understand, dear, that whatever anyone else may have thought, I never 
believed a word of them’, etc., etc , etc But nobody had asked her the 
uncomfortable questions that she had been fearing ‘I’ve been teaching m a 
school near London’ had satisfied everyone, they had not even asked her the 
name of the school. Never, she saw, would she have to confess that she had 
slept in Trafalgar Square and been arrested for begging The fact is that people 
who live m small country towns have only a very dim conception of anything 
that happens more than ten miles from their own front door The world 
outside is a terra incognita , inhabited, no doubt, by dragons and 
anthropophagi, but not particularly interesting 

Even Dorothy’s father had greeted her as though she had only been away for 
the week-end He was in his study when she arrived, musingly smoking his 
pipe in front of the grandfather clock, whose glass, smashed by the 
charwoman’s broom-handle four months ago, was still unmended As 
Dorothy came into the room he took his pipe out of his mouth and put it away 
in his pocket with an absent-minded, old-mannish movement He looked a 
great deal older, Dorothy thought 

‘So here you are at last,’ he said ‘Did you have a good journey?’ 

- Dorothy put her arms round his neck and touched his silver-pale cheek with 



A Clergyman's Daughter 421 

her lips As she disengaged herself he patted her shoulder with a just 
perceptible trace more affection than usual 

‘What made you take it into your head to run away like that?’ he said 
‘I told you, Father-I lost my memory 9 

‘Hm,’ said the Rector, and Dorothy saw that he did not believe her, never 
would believe her, and that on many and many a future occasion, when he was 
in a less agreeable mood than at present, that escapade would be brought up 
against her ‘Well , 9 he added, ‘when you’ve taken your bag upstairs, just bring 
your typewriter down here, would you? I want you to type out my sermon 9 
Not much that was of interest had happened m the town Ye Olde Tea 
Shoppe was enlarging its premises, to the further disfigurement of the High 
Street Mrs Pither’s rheumatism was better (thanks to the angelica tea, no 
doubt), but Mr Pither had ‘been under the doctor 9 and they were afraid he had 
stone in the bladder Mr Blifil- Gordon was now m Parliament, a docile 
deadhead on the back benches of the Conservative Party Old Mr Tombs had 
died just after Christmas, and Miss Foote had taken over seven of his cats and 
made heroic efforts to find homes for the others Eva Twiss, the niece of Mr 
Twiss the ironmonger, had had an illegitimate baby, which had died Proggett 
had dug the kitchen garden and sowed a few seeds, and the broad beans and the 
first peas were just showing The shop-debts had begun to mount up again 
after the creditors’ meeting, and there was six pounds owing to Cargill Victor 
Stone had had a controversy with Professor Coulton m the Church Times, 
about the Holy Inquisition, and utterly routed him Ellen’s eczema had been 
very bad all the winter Walph Blifil-Gordon had had two poems accepted by 
the London Mercury 

Dorothy went into the conservatory She had got a big job on 
hand-costumes for a pageant that the schoolchildren were gomg to have on St 
George’s Day, in aid of the organ fund Not a penny had been paid towards the 
organ during the past eight months, and it was perhaps as well that the Rector 
always threw the organ-people’s bills away unopened, for their tone was 
growing more and more sulphurous Dorothy had racked her brams for a way 
of raising some money, and finally decided on a historical pageant, beginning 
with Julius Caesar and ending with the Duke of Wellington They might raise 
two pounds by a pageant, she thought- with luck and a fine day, they might 
even raise three pounds* 

She looked round the conservatory She had hardly been in here since 
coming home, and evidently nothing had been touched during her absence 
Her things were lying just as she had left them, but the dust was thick on 
everything. Her sewing-machine was on the table amid the old familiar litter of 
scraps of cloth, sheets of brown paper, cotton-reels and pots of paint, and 
though the needle had rusted, the thread was still in it And, yes* there were the 
jackboots that she had been making the night she went away. She picked one of 
them up and looked at it. Something stirred m her heart Yes, say what you 
like, they were good jackboots! What a pity they had never been used! 
However, they would come in useful for the pageant For Charles II, 
perhaps-or, no, better not have Charles II, have Oliver Cromwell instead; 



422 A Clergyman’s Daughter 

because if you had Oliver Cromwell you wouldn’t have to make him a wig 

Dorothy lighted the oilstove, found her scissors and two sheets of brown 
paper, and sat down There was a mountain of clothes to be made Better start 
off with Julius Caesar’s breastplate, she thought It was always that wretched 
armour that made all the trouble' What did a Roman soldier’s armour look 
like? Dorothy made an effort, and called to mind the statue of some idealized 
curly-bearded emperor in the Roman Room at the British Museum You 
might make a sort of rough breastplate out of glue and brown paper, and glue 
narrow strips of paper across it to represent the plates of the armour, and then 
silver them over No helmet to make, thank goodness' Julius Caesar always 
wore a laurel wreath-ashamed of his baldness, no doubt, like Mr Warburton 
But what about greaves? Did they wear greaves in Julius Caesar’s time? And 
boots? Was a caligum a boot or a sandal? 

After a few moments she stopped with the shears resting on her knee A 
thought which had been haunting her like some mexorcizable ghost at every 
unoccupied moment durmg the past week had returned once more to distract 
her It was the thought of what Mr Warburton had said to her in the tram-of 
what her life was going to be like hereafter, unmarried and without money 

It was not that she was m any doubt about the external facts of her future 
She could see it all quite clearly before her Ten years, perhaps, as unsalaried 
curate, and then back to school-teaching Not necessarily in qmte such a 
school as Mrs Creevy’s-no doubt she could do something rather better for 
herself than that-but at least in some more or less shabby, more or less prison- 
like school, or perhaps m some even bleaker, even less human kind of 
drudgery Whatever happened, at the very best, she had got to face the destiny 
that is common to all lonely and penniless women ‘The Old Maids of Old 
England’, as somebody called them She was twenty-eight-just old enough to 
enter their ranks 

But it didn’t matter, it didn’t matter' That was the thing that you could 
never drive into the heads of the Mr Warburtons of this world, not if you 
talked to them for a thousand years, that mere outward things like poverty and 
drudgery, and even loneliness, don’t matter m themselves It is the things that 
happen in your heart that matter For just a moment-an evil moment-while 
Mr Warburton was talking to her in the tram, she had known the fear of 
poverty But she had mastered it, it was not a thing worth worrying about It 
was not because of that that she had got to stiffen her courage and remake the 
whole structure of her mmd 

No, it was something far more fundamental, it was the deadly emptmesis that 
she had discovered at the heart of things. She thought of how a year ago she 
had sat in this chair, with these scissors in her hand, doing precisely what she 
was doing now; and yet it was as though then and now she had been two 
different beings Where had she gone, that well-meaning, ridiculous girl who 
had prayed ecstatically m summer-scented fields and pricked her arm as a 
punishment for sacrilegious thoughts? And where is any of ourselves of even a 
year ago^And yet after all-and here lay the trouble- she was the same girl 
Beliefs change, thoughts change, but there is some inner part of the soul that 



A Clergyman’s Daughter 423 

does not change Faith vanishes, but the need for faith remains the same as 
before 

And given only faith, how can anything else matter? How can anything 
dismay you if only there is some purpose m the world which you can serve, and 
which, while serving it, you can understand? Your whole life is illumined by 
the sense of purpose There is no weariness m your heart, no doubts, no feeling 
of futility, no Baudelairean ennui waiting for unguarded hours Every act is 
significant, every moment sanctified, woven by faith as mto a pattern, a fabric 
of never-ending joy 

She began to meditate upon the nature of life You emerged from the womb, 
you lived sixty or seventy years, and then you died and rotted And m every 
detail of your life, if no ultimate purpose redeemed it, there was a quality of 
greyness, of desolation, that could never be described, but which you could 
feel like a physical pang at your heart Life, if the grave really ends it, is 
monstrous and dreadful No use trying to argue it away Think of life as it 
really is, think of the details of life, and then think that there is no meaning m it, 
no purpose, no goal except the grave Surely only fools or self-deceivers, or 
those whose lives are exceptionally fortunate, can face that thought without 
flinching? 

She shifted her position in her chair But after all there must be some 
meaning, some purpose in it all 1 The world cannot be an accident. Everything 
that happens must have a cause-ultimately, therefore, a purpose Since you 
exist, God must have created you, and since He created you a conscious being. 
He must be conscious The greater doesn’t come out of the less He created 
you, and He will kill you, for His oWn purpose. But that purpose is inscrutable 
It is in the nature of thmgs that you can never discover it, and perhaps even if 
you did discover it you would be averse to it Your life and death, it may be, are 
a single note in the eternal orchestra that plays for His diversion And suppose 
you don’t like the tune? She thought of that dreadful unfrocked clergyman m 
Trafalgar Square Had she dreamed the things he said, or had he really said 
them? ‘Therefore with Demons and Archdemons and with all the company of 
Hell’ But that was silly, really For your not liking the tune was also part of the 
tune 

Her mind struggled with the problem, while perceiving that there was no 
solution There was, she saw clearly, no possible substitute for faith; no pagan 
acceptance of life as sufficient to itself, no pantheistic cheer-up stuff, no 
pseudo-religion of ‘progress’ with visions of glittering Utopias and ant-heaps 
of steel and concrete It is all or nothing Either life on earth is a preparation for 
something greater and more lasting, or it is meaningless, dark, and dreadful 

Dorothy started. A frizzling sound was coming from the glue-pot She had 
forgotten to put any water in the saucepan, and the glue was beginning to bum 
She took the saucepan, hastened to the scullery sink to replenish it, then 
brought it back and put it on the oilstove again I simply must get that 
breastplate done before supper 1 she thought After Julius Caesar there was 
William the Conqueror to be thought of More armour! And presently she 
must go along to the kitchen and remind EUen to boil some potatoes to go with 



424 A Clergyman's Daughter 

the mmced beef for supper, also there was her ‘memo list’ to be written out for 
tomorrow She shaped the two halves of the breastplate, cut out the armholes 
and neckholes, and then stopped agam 

Where had she got to? She had been saying that if death ends all, then there 
is no hope and no meaning m anything Well, what then? 

The action of going to the scullery and refilling the saucepan had changed 
the tenor of her thoughts She perceived, for a moment at least, that she had 
allowed herself to fall into exaggeration and self-pity What a fuss about 
nothing, after all* As though m reality there were not people beyond number in 
the same case as herself 1 All over the world, thousands, millions of them, 
people who had lost their faith without losing their need of faith ‘Half the 
parsons’ daughters m England,’ Mr Warburton had said He was probably 
right And not only parsons’ daughters, people of every description-people m 
illness and loneliness and failure, people leading thwarted, discouraging 
lives-people who needed faith to support them, and who hadn’t got it Perhaps 
even nuns m convents, scrubbmg floors and singing Ave Marias , secretly 
unbelieving 

And how cowardly, after all, to regret a superstition that you had got rid 
of-to want to believe something that you knew m your bones to be untrue 1 

And yet-' 

Dorothy had put down her scissors Almost from force of habit, as though 
her return home, which had not restored her faith, had restored the outward 
habits of piety, she knelt down beside her chair She buried her face m her 
hands She began to pray 

‘Lord, I believe, help Thou my unbelief Lord, I believe, I believe, help 
Thou my unbelief ’ 

It was useless, absolutely useless Even as she spoke the words she was aware 
of their uselessness, and was half ashamed of her action She raised her head 
And at that moment there stole into her nostrils a warm, evil smell, forgotten 
these eight months but unutterably familiar-the smell of glue The water in 
the saucepan was bubbling noisily Dorothy jumped to her feet and felt the 
handle of the glue-brush- The glue was softemng-would be liquid m another 
five minutes 

The grandfather clock m her father’s study struck six. Dorothy started She 
realized that she had wasted twenty minutes, and her conscience stabbed her 
so hard that all the questions that had been worrymg her fled out of her mmd 
What on earth have I been doing all this time? she thought, and at that moment 
it really seemed to her that she did not know what she had been doing. She 
admonished herself Come on, Dorothy 1 No slacking, please 1 You’ve got to get 
that breastplate done before supper She sat down, filled her mouth with pins 
and began pinning the two halves of the breastplate together, to get it into 
shape before the glue should be ready 

The smell of glue was the answer to her prayer. She did not know this. She 
did not reflect, consciously, that the solution to her difficulty lay m accepting 
the fact that there was no solution; that if one gets on with the job that lies to 
hand, the ultimate purpose of the job fades into insignificance, that faith and 



A Clergyman' s Daughter _ 425 

no faith are very much the same provided that one is doing what is customary, 
useful, and acceptable She could not formulate these thoughts as yet, she 
could only live them Much later, perhaps, she would formulate them and 
draw comfort from them 

There was still a minute or two before the glue would be ready to use 
Dorothy finished pinning the breastplate together, and in the same instant 
began mentally sketching the innumerable costumes that were yet to be made 
After William the Conqueror-was it chain mail in William the Conqueror’s 
day?-there were Robin Hood- Lincoln Green and a bow and arrow-and 
Thomas k Becket m his cope and mitre, and Queen Elizabeth’s ruff, and a 
cocked hat for the Duke of Wellington And I must go and see about those 
potatoes at half past six, she thought And there was her ‘memo list’ to be 
written out for tomorrow Tomorrow was Wednesday-mustn’t forget to set 
the alarm clock for half past five She took a slip of paper and began writing out 
the ‘memo list’ 

70c HC 

Mrs J baby next month go and see her 

Breakfast Bacon 

She paused to think of fresh items Mrs J was Mrs Jowett, the blacksmith’s 
wife, she came sometimes to be churched after her babies were born, but only 
if you coaxed her tactfully beforehand And I must take old Mrs Frew some 
paregoric lozenges, Dorothy thought, and then perhaps she’ll speak to Georgie 
and stop him eating those biscuits during the sermon She added Mrs Frew to 
her list And then what about tomorrow’s dinner-luncheon? We simply must 
pay Cargill something* she thought And tomorrow was the day of the 
Mothers’ Union tea, and they had finished the novel that Miss Foote had been 
reading to them The question was, what to get for them next? There didn’t 
seem to be any more books by Gene Stratton Porter, their favourite What 
about Warwick Deeping? Too highbrow, perhaps? And I must ask Proggett to 
get us some young cauliflowers to plant out, she thought finally 

The glue had liquefied Dorothy took two fresh sheets of brown paper, 
sliced them into narrow strips, and-rather awkwardly, because of the 
difficulty of keeping the breastplate convex-pasted the strips horizontally 
across it, back and front By degrees it stiffened under her hands When she 
had reinforced it all over she set it on end to look at it. It really wasn’t half bad* 
One more coatmg of paper and it would be almost like real armour We must 
make that pageant a success* she thought What a pity we can’t borrow a horse 
from somebody and have Boadicea in her chariot* We might make five pounds 
if we had a really good chariot, with scythes on the wheels And what about 
Hengist and Horsa? Cross-gartering and winged helmets Dorothy sliced two 
more sheets of brown paper mto strips, and took up the breastplate to give it its 
final coating. The problem of faith and no faith had vanished utterly from hef 
mind It was beginning to get dark, but, too busy to stop and light the lamp, 
she worked on, pasting strip after strip of paper into place, with absorbed, with 
pious concentration, in the penetrating smell of the glue-pot 



coming 

up 

for 

air 


COMING UP FOR AIR 
‘He’s dead, but he won’t he down’ 

Popular song 



PART I 


i 


The idea really came to me the day I got my new false teeth 
I remember the morning well At about a quarter to eight I’d mpped out of 
bed and got into the bathroom just m time to shut the kids out It was a beastly 
January morning, with a dirty yellowish-grey sky Down below, out of the 
little square of bathroom wmdow, I could see the ten yards by five of grass, 
with a privet hedge round it and a bare patch m the middle, that we call the 
back garden There’s the same back garden, some privets, and same grass, 
behind every house in Ellesmere Road Only difference-where there are no 
kids there’s no bare patch in the middle 
I was trying to shave with a bluntish razor-blade while the water ran into the 
bath My face looked back at me out of the mirror, and underneath, m a 
tumbler of water on the little shelf over the washbasm, the teeth that belonged 
in the face It was the temporary set that Warner, my dentist, had given me to 
wear while the new ones were being made I haven’t such a bad face, really It’s 
one of those bricky-red faces that go with butter-coloured hair and pale-blue 
eyes I’ve never gone grey or bald, thank God, and when I’ve got my teeth m I 
probably don’t look my age, which is forty-five 
Making a mental note to buy razor-blades, I got into the bath and started 
soaping I soaped my arms (I’ve got those kind of pudgy arms that are freckled 
up to the elbow) and then took the back-brush and soaped my shoulder-blades, 
which in the ordinary way I can’t reach It’s a nuisance, but there are several 
parts of my body that I can’t reach nowadays The truth is that I’m inclined to 
be a little bit on the fat side I don’t mean that I’m like something in a side- 
show at a fair My weight isn’t much over fourteen stone, and last time I 
measured round my waist it was either forty-eight or forty-nine, I forget 
which. And I’m not what they call ‘disgustingly’ fat, I haven’t got one of those 
bellies that sag half-way down to the knees. It’s merely that I’m a little bit 
broad in the beam, with a tendency to be barrel-shaped Do you know the 
active, hearty kind of fat man, the athletic bouncing type that’s nicknamed 
Fatty or Tubby and is always the life and soul of the party? I’m that type 
‘Fatty’ they mostly call me Fatty Bowlmg George Bowling is my real name. 



432 Corning up for Air 

But at that moment I didn’t feel like the life and soul of the party And it 
struck me that nowadays I nearly always do have a morose kind of feeling m the 
early mornings, although I sleep well and my digestion’s good I knew what it 
was, of course-it was those bloody false teeth The things were magnified by 
the water in the tumbler, and they were grinning at me like the teeth m a skull 
It gives you a rotten feeling to have your gums meet, a sort of pmched-up, 
withered feeling like when you’ve bitten into a sour apple Besides, say what 
you will, false teeth are a landmark When your last natural tooth goes, the time 
when you can kid yourself that you’re a Hollywood sheik, is definitely at an 
end And I was fat as well as forty-five As I stood up to soap my crutch I had a 
look at my figure It’s all rot about fat men being unable to see their feet, but 
it’s a fact that when I stand upright I can only see the front halves of mine No 
woman, I thought as I worked the soap round my belly, will ever look twice at 
me again, unless she’s paid to Not that at that moment I particularly wanted 
any woman to look twice at me 

But it struck me that this morning there were reasons why I ought to have 
been m a better mood To begin with I wasn’t working today The old car, in 
which I ‘cover’ my district (I ought to tell you that I’m m the insurance 
business The Flying Salamander Life, fire, burglary, twins, 
shipwreck-everythmg), was temporarily m dock, and though I’d got to look m 
at the London office to drop some papers, I was really taking the day off to go 
and fetch my new false teeth And besides, there was another business that had 
been in and out of my mmd for some time past This was that I had seventeen 
quid which nobody else had heard about-nobody in the family, that is It had 
happened this way A chap in our firm, Mellors by name, had got hold of a 
book called Astrology applied, to Horse-racing which proved that it’s all a 
question of influence of the planets on the colours the jockey is wearing Well, 
m some race or other there was a mare called Corsair’s Bride, a complete 
outsider, but her jockey’s colour was green, which it seemed was just the 
colour for the planets that happened to be in the ascendant Mellors, who was 
deeply bitten with this astrology business, was putting several qmd on the 
horse and went down on his knees to me to do the same In the end, chiefly to 
shut him up, I risked ten bob, though I don’t bet as a general rule Sure enough 
Corsair’s Bride came home m a walk I forget the exact odds, but my share 
worked out at seventeen quid By a kind of instinct-rather queer, and 
probably indicating another landmark in my hfe-I just quietly put the money 
in the bank and said nothing to anybody I’d never done anything of this kind 
before A good husband and father would have spent it on a dress for Hilda 
(that’s my wife) and boots for the kids. But I’d been a good husband and father 
for fifteen years and I was beginning to get fed up with it 

After I’d soaped myself all over I felt better and lay down in the bath to think 
about my seventeen quid and what to spend it on. The alternatives, it seemed 
to me, were either a week-end with a woman or dribbling it quietly away on 
odds and ends such as cigars and double whiskies I’d just turned on some 
more hot water and was thinking about women and cigars when there was a 
noise like a herd of buffaloes coming down the two steps that lead to the 



Coming up for Avr 433 

bathroom It was the kids, of course Two kids m a house the size of ours is like 
a quart of beer m a pint mug There was a frantic stamping outside and then a 
yell of agony 

‘Dadda * 1 wanna come in 1 ’ 

‘Well, you can’t Clear out 1 ’ 

‘But dadda' I wanna go somewhere 1 ’ 

‘Go somewhere else, then Hop it I’m having my bath ’ 

‘Dad-da 1 1 wanna go some-where *’ 

No use' I knew the danger signal The w c is m the bathroom-it would be, 
of course, in a house like ours I hooked the plug out of the bath and got 
partially dry as quickly as I could As I opened the door, little Billy-my 
youngest, aged seven-shot past me, dodging the smack which I aimed at his 
head It was only when I was nearly dressed and looking for a tie that I 
discovered that my neck was still soapy 
It’s a rotten thing to have a soapy neck It gives you a disgusting sticky 
feeling, and the queer thing is that, however carefully you sponge it away, 
when you’ve once discovered that your neck is soapy you feel sticky for the rest 
of the day I went downstairs m a bad temper and ready to make myself 
disagreeable 

Our dining-room, like the other dining-rooms in Ellesmere Road, is a poky 
little place, fourteen feet by twelve, or maybe it’s twelve by ten, and the 
Japanese oak sideboard, with the two empty decanters and the silver egg-stand 
that Hilda’s mother gave us for a wedding present, doesn’t leave much room 
Old Hilda was glooming behind the teapot, m her usual state of alarm and 
dismay because the News Chronicle had announced that the price of butter was 
going up, or something She hadn’t lighted the gas-fire, and though the 
windows were shut it was beastly cold I bent down and put a match to the fire, 
breathing rather loudly through my nose (bending always makes me puff and 
blow) as a kind of hint to Hilda She gave me the little sidelong glance that she 
always gives me when she thinks I’m doing something extravagant 
Hilda is thirty-nine, and when I first knew her she looked just like a hare So 
she does still, but she’s got very thin and rather wizened, with a perpetual 
brooding, worried look m her eyes, and when she’s more upset than usual she’s 
got a trick of humping her shoulders and foldmg her arms across her breast, 
like an old gypsy woman over her fire She’s one of those people who get their 
mam kick m life out of foreseeing disasters Only petty disasters, of course As 
for wars, earthquakes, plagues, famines, and revolutions, she pays no attention 
to them Butter is going up, and the gas-bill is enormous, and the kids’ boots 
are wearing out, and there’s another instalment due on the radio-that’s 
Hilda’s litany She gets what I’ve finally decided is a definite pleasure out of 
rocking herself to and fro with her arms across her breast, and glooming at me, 
‘But, George, it’s very serious* I don’t know what we’re gomg to do* I don’t 
know where die money’s coming from! You don’t seem to realize how serious 
it is*’ and so on and so forth It’s fixed firmly in her head that we shall end up in 
the workhouse. The funny thing is that if we ever do get to the workhouse 
Hilda won’t mind it a quarter as much as I shall, in fact she’ll probably rather 



Coming up for Air 


434 

enjoy the feeling of security 

The kids were downstairs already, having washed and dressed at lightning 
speed, as they always do when there’s no chance to keep anyone else out of the 
bathroom When I got to the breakfast table they were having an argument 
which went to the tune of ‘Yes, you did'’ ‘No, I didn’t' 5 ‘Yes, you did' 5 ‘No, I 
didn’t' ’ and looked like going on for the rest of the morning, until I told them 
to cheese it There are only the two of them, Billy, aged seven, and Lorna, aged 
eleven It’s a peculiar feeling that I have towards the kids A great deal of the 
time I can hardly stick the sight of them As for their conversation, it’s just 
unbearable They’re at that dreary bread-and-butter age when a kid’s mind 
revolves round things like rulers, pencil-boxes, and who got top marks in 
French At other times, especially when they’re asleep, I have quite a different 
feeling Sometimes I’ve stood over their cots, on summer evenings when it’s 
light, and watched them sleeping, with their round faces and their tow- 
coloured hair, several shades lighter than mine, and it’s given me that feeling 
you read about in the Bible when it says your bowels yearn At such times I feel 
that I’m just a kind of dried-up seed-pod that doesn’t matter twopence and 
that my sole importance has been to bring these creatures mto the world and 
feed them while they’re growing But that’s only at moments Most of the time 
my separate existence looks pretty important to me, I feel that there’s life m the 
old dog yet and plenty of good times ahead, and the notion of myself as a kind 
of tame dairy-cow for a lot of women and kids to chase up and down doesn’t 
appeal to me 

We didn’t talk much at breakfast Hilda was m her ‘I don’t know what we’re 
gomg to do' 5 mood, partly owing to the price of butter and partly because the 
Christmas holidays were nearly over and there was still five pounds owing on 
the school fees for last term I ate my boiled egg and spread a piece of bread 
with Golden Crown marmalade Hilda will persist m buying the stuff It’s 
fivepence-halfpenny a pound, and the label tells you, m the smallest print the 
law allows, that it contains c a certain proportion of neutral fruit- juice’. This 
started me off, m the rather irritating way I have sometimes, talking about 
neutral fruit-trees, wondering what they looked like and what countries they 
grew m, until finally Hilda got angry It’s not that she minds me chipping her, 
it’s only that m some obscure way she thinks it’s wicked to make jokes about 
anything you save money on 

I had a look at the paper, but there wasn’t much news Down in Spain and 
over in China they were murdering one another as usual, a woman’s legs had 
been found in a railway waiting-room, and King Zog’s wedding was wavering 
in the balance Finally, at about ten o’clock, rather earlier than I’d intended, I 
started out for town. The kids had gone off to play in the public gardens It was 
a beastly raw morning. As I stepped out of the front door a nasty little gust of 
wind caught the soapy patch on my neck and made me suddenly feel that my 
clothes didn’t fit and that I was sticky all over 



2 


Do you know the road I live m-Ellesmere Road, West Bletchley? Even if you 
don’t, you know fifty others exactly like it 

You know how these streets fester all over the inner-outer suburbs Always 
the same Long, long rows of little semi-detached houses-the numbers in 
Ellesmere Road run to 212 and ours is 191-as much alike as council houses and 
generally uglier The stucco front, the creosoted gate, the privet hedge, the 
green front door The Laurels, the Myrtles, the Hawthorns, Mon Abn, Mon 
Repos, Belle Vue At perhaps one house in fifty some anti-social type who’ll 
probably end in the workhouse has painted his front door blue instead of 
green 

That sticky feeling round my neck had put me into a demoralized kind of 
mood It’s curious how it gets you down to have a sticky neck. It seems to take 
all the bounce out of you, like when you suddenly discover m a public place 
that the sole of one of your shoes is commg off I had no illusions about myself 
that mormng It was almost as if I could stand at a distance and watch myself 
commg down the road, with my fat, red face and my false teeth and my vulgar 
clothes A chap like me is incapable of looking like a gentleman Even if you 
saw me at two hundred yards’ distance you’d know immediately-not, perhaps, 
that I was in the insurance business, but that I was some kind of tout or 
salesman The clothes I was wearmg were practically the uniform of the tribe 
Grey herring-bone suit, a bit the worse for wear, blue overcoat costing fifty 
shillings, bowler hat, and no gloves And I’ve got the look that’s peculiar to 
people who sell things on commission, a kind of coarse, brazen look At my 
best moments, when I’ve got a new suit or when I’m smoking a cigar, I might 
pass for a bookie or a publican, and when things are very bad I might be 
touting vacuum cleaners, but at ordinary times you’d place me correctly ‘Five 
to ten qmd a week’, you’d say as soon as you saw me Economically and socially 
I’m about at the average level of Ellesmere Road 

I had the street pretty much to myself The men had bunked to catch the 
8,21 and the women were fiddling with the gas-stoves When you’ve time to 
look about you, and when you happen to be m the right mood, it’s a thing that 
makes you laugh inside to walk down these streets m the inner-outer suburbs 
and to think of the lives that go on there Because, after all, what w a road like 
Ellesmere Road? Just a prison with the cells all in a row A line of semi- 
detached torture-chambers where the poor little five-to-ten-pound-a-weekers 
quake and shiver, every one of them with the boss twisting his tail and his wife 



436 Coming up for Air 

riding him like the nightmare and the kids sucking his blood like leeches 
There’s a lot of rot talked about the sufferings of the working class I’m not so 
sorry for the proles myself Did you ever know a navvy who lay awake thinking 
about the sack> The prole suffers physically, but he’s a free man when he isn’t 
working But in every one of those little stucco boxes there’s some poor bastard 
who’s never free except when he’s fast asleep and dreaming that he’s got the 
boss down the bottom of a well and is bunging lumps of coal at him 

Of course, the basic trouble with people like us, I said to myself, is that we all 
imagine we’ve got something to lose To begin with, nine-tenths of the people 
m Ellesmere Road are under the impression that they own their houses 
Ellesmere Road, and the whole quarter surrounding it, until you get to the 
High Street, is part of a huge racket called the Hespendes Estate, the property 
of the Cheerful Credit Building Society Building societies are probably the 
cleverest racket of modern times My own line, insurance, is a swindle, I 
admit, but it’s an open swindle with the cards on the table But the beauty of 
the building society swindles is that your victims think you’re doing them a 
kindness You wallop them, and they lick your hand I sometimes think I’d like 
to have the Hespendes Estate surmounted by an enormous statue to the god of 
building societies It would be a queer sort of god Among other things it 
would be bisexual The top half would be a managing director and the bottom 
half would be a wife in the family way In one hand it would carry an enormous 
key-the key of the workhouse, of course-and m the other-what do they call 
those things like French horns with presents coming out of thenP-a 
cornucopia, out of which would be pouring portable radios, life-insurance 
policies, false teeth, aspirins, French letters, and concrete garden rollers 
As a matter of fact, m Ellesmere Road we don’t own our houses, even when 
we’ve finished paying for them They’re not freehold, only leasehold They’re 
priced at five-fifty, payable over a period of sixteen years, and they’re a class of 
house, which, if you bought them for cash down, would cost round about 
three-eighty. That represents a profit of a hundred and seventy for the 
Cheerful Credit, but needless to say that Cheerful Credit makes a lot more out 
of it than that Three-eighty includes the builder’s profit, but the Cheerful 
Credit, under the name of Wilson & Bloom, builds the houses itself and scoops 
the builder’s profit. All it has to pay for is the materials But it also scoops the 
profit on the materials, because under the name of Brookes & Scatterby it sells 
itself the bncks, tiles, doors, window-frames, sand, cement, and, I think, glass 
And it wouldn’t altogether surprise me to learn that under yet another alias it 
sells itself the timber to make the doors and window-frames. Also-and this 
was something which we really might have foreseen, though it gave us all a 
knock when we discovered it-the Cheerful Credit doesn’t always keep to its 
end of the bargain When Ellesmere Road was built it gave on some open 
fields-nothlng very wonderful, but good for the kids to play m-known as 
Platt’s Meadows There was nothing in black and white, but it had always been 
understood that Platt’s Meadows weren’t to be built on. However, West 
Bletchley was a growing suburb, RothwelPs jam factory had opened in ’28 and 
the Anglo-American All-Steel Bicycle factory started m ’33, and the 



Coming up for Air 4 37 

population was increasing and rents were going up I’ve never seen Sir 
Herbert Crum or any other of the big noises of the Cheerful Credit m the flesh, 
but m my mind’s eye I could see their mouths watering Suddenly the builders 
arrived and houses began to go up on Platt’s Meadows There was a howl of 
agony from the Hespendes, and a tenants’ defence association was set up No 
use 1 Crum’s lawyers had knocked the stuffing out of us in five minutes, and 
Platt’s Meadows were built over But the really subtle swindle, the one that 
makes me feel old Crum deserved his baronetcy, is the mental one. Merely 
because of the illusion that we own our houses and have what’s called ‘a stake 
in the country’, we poor saps m the Hespendes, and in all such places, are 
turned into Crum’s devoted slaves for ever We’re all respectable 
householders-that’s to say Tories, yes-men, and bumsuckers Daren’t kill the 
goose that lays the gilded eggs' And the fact that actually we aren’t 
householders, that we’re all m the middle of paying for our houses and eaten 
up with the ghastly fear that something might happen before we’ve made the 
last payment, merely increases the effect We’re all bought, and what’s more 
we’re bought with our own money Every one of those poor downtrodden 
bastards, sweating his guts out to pay twice the proper price for a brick doll’s 
house that’s called Belle Vue because there’s no view and the bell doesn’t 
nng-every one of those poor suckers would die on the field of battle to save his 
country from Bolshevism 

I turned down Walpole Road and got into the High Street There’s a tram to 
London at to 14 I was just passing the Sixpenny Bazaar when I remembered 
the mental note I’d made that morning to buy a packet of razor-blades When I 
got to the soap counter the floor-manager, or whatever his proper title is, was 
cursing the girl in charge there Generally there aren’t many people m the 
Sixpenny at that hour of the morning Sometimes if you go m just after 
opening-time you see all the girls lined up m a row and given their morning 
curse, just to get them into trim for the day They say these big chain-stores 
have chaps with special powers of sarcasm and abuse who are sent from branch 
to branch to ginger the girls up The floor-manager was an ugly little devil 
under-sized, with very square shoulders and a spiky grey moustache He’d just 
pounced on her about something, some mistake in the change evidently, and 
was going for her with a voice like a circular saw 

‘Ho, no 1 Course you couldn’t count it' Course you couldn’t Too much 
trouble, that’d be Ho, no 1 ’ 

Before I could stop myself I’d caught the girl’s eye It wasn’t so nice for her 
to have a fat middle-aged bloke with a red face looking on while she took her 
cursing I turned away as quickly as I could and pretended to be interested in 
some stuff at the next counter, curtain rings or something He was on to her 
again He was one of those people who turn away and then suddenly dart back 
at you, like a dragon-fly 

‘ Course you couldn’t count it' Doesn’t matter to you if we’re two bob out. 
Doesn’t matter at all. What’s two bob to you 7 Couldn’t ask you to go to the 
trouble of counting it properly Ho, nol Nothing matters ’ere ’cept your 
convenience. You don’t think about others, do you>’ 



438 Corning up for Air 

This went on for about five minutes m a voice you could hear half across the 
shop He kept turning away to make her think he’d finished with her and then 
Hgrfing - back to have another go As I edged a bit farther off I had a glance at 
them The girl was a kid about eighteen, rather fat, with a sort of moony face, 
the kind that would never get the change right anyway She’d turned pale pink 
and she was wriggling, actually wriggling with pam It was just the same as if 
he’d been cutting into her with a whip The girls at the other counters were 
pretending not to hear He was an ugly, stiff-built little devil, the sort of cock- 
sparrow type of man that sticks his chest out and puts his hands under his coat- 
tails-the type that’d be a sergeant-major only they aren’t tall enough Do you 
notice how often they have under-sized men for these bullying jobs* He was 
sticking his face, moustaches and all, almost into hers so as to scream at her 
better And the girl all pink and wriggling 

Finally he decided that he’d said enough and strutted off like an admiral on 
the quarter-deck, and I came up to the counter for my razor-blades He knew 
I’d heard every word, and so did she, and both of them knew I knew they 
knew But the worst of it was that for my benefit she’d got to pretend that 
nothing had happened and put on the standoffish keep-your-distance attitude 
that a shopgirl’s supposed to keep up with male customers Had to act the 
grown-up young lady half a minute after I’d seen her cursed like a skivvy 1 Her 
face was still pink and her hands were trembling I asked her for penny blades 
and she started fumbling m the threepenny tray Then the little devil of a floor- 
manager turned our way and for a moment both of us thought he was coming 
back to begin again The girl flinched like a dog that sees the whip But she was 
looking at me out of the corner of her eye I could see that because I’d seen her 
cursed she hated me like the devil Queer' 

I cleared out with my razor-blades Why do they stand it* I was thinking 
Pure funk, of course One back-answer and you get the sack It’s the same 
everywhere I thought of the lad that sometimes serves me at the chain-store 
grocery we deal at A great hefty lump of twenty, with cheeks like roses and 
enormous fore-arms, ought to be working m a blacksmith’s shop. And there he 
is in his white jacket, bent double across the counter, rubbing his hands 
together with his ‘Yes, sir' Very true, sir' Pleasant weather for the time of the 
year, sir' What can I have the pleasure of getting you today, sir*’ practically 
asking you to kick his bum Orders, of course The customer is always right 
The thing you can see m his face is mortal dread that you might report him for 
impertinence and get him sacked Besides, how’s he to know you aren’t one of 
the narks the company sends round? Fear' We swim m it It’s our element 
Everyone that isn’t scared stiff of losing his job is scared stiff of war, or 
Fascism, or Communism, or something Jews sweating when they think of 
Hitler. It crossed my mind that that little bastard with the spiky moustache 
was probably a damn sight more scared for his job than the girl was Probably 
gotafamfiy to support And perhaps, who knows, at home he’s meek and mild, 
grows cucurnhers in the back garden, lets his wife sit on him and the kids pull 
his moustache. And by the same token you never read about a Spanish 
Jnqrusitor or one of these higher-ups m the Russian Qgpu without being told 



Coming up for Air 439 

that m private life he was such a good kind man, best of husbands and fathers, 
devoted to his tame canary, and so forth 
The girl at the soap counter was looking after me as I went out of the door 
She’d have murdered me if she could How she hated me because of what I’d 
seen* Much more than she hated the floor-manager 


3 


There was a bombing plane flying low overhead For a minute or two it seemed 
to be keeping pace with the tram Two vulgar kind of blokes m shabby 
overcoats, obviously commercials of the lowest type, newspaper canvassers 
probably, were sitting opposite me One of them was reading the Mail and the 
other was reading the Express I could see by their manner-that they’d spotted 
me for one of their kind Up at the other end of the carriage two lawyers’ clerks 
with black bags were keeping up a conversation full of legal baloney that was 
meant to impress the rest of us and show that they didn’t belong to the 
common herd 

I was watching the backs of the houses sliding past The line from West 
Bletchley runs most of the way through slums, but it’s kind of peaceful, the 
glimpses you get of little backyards with bits of flowers stuck in boxes and the 
flat roofs where the women peg out the washing and the bird-cage on the wall 
The great black bombing plane swayed a little in the air and zoomed ahead so 
that I couldn’t see it I was sitting with my back to the engine One of the 
commercials cocked his eye at it for just a second. I knew what he was thinking 
For that matter it’s what everybody else is thinking You don’t have to be a 
highbrow to think such thoughts nowadays In two years’ time, one year’s 
time, what shall we be doing when we see one of those things? Making a dive 
for the cellar, wetting our bags with fright 
The -commercial bloke put down his Daily Mail 
‘Templegate’s winner come m,’ he said 

The lawyers’ clerks were sprouting some learned rot about fee-simple and 
peppercorns The other commercial felt in his waistcoat pocket and took out a 
bent Woodbine He felt in the other pocket and then leaned across to me 
‘Got a match, Tubby?’ 

I felt for my matches ‘Tubby’, you notice That’s interesting, really For 
about a couple of minutes I stopped thinking about bombs and began thinking 
about my figure as I’d -studied it in my bath that morning 

It’s quite true I’m tubby, in fact my upper half is almost exactly the shape of 
a tub But what’s interesting, I think, is that merely because yon happen to be a 
little bit fat, almost anyone, even a total stranger, will take it for granted to give 
you a nickname that’s an insulting comment on your personal appearance* 



440 Coming up for Air 

Suppose a chap was a hunchback or had a squint or a hare-lip-would you give 
him a nickname to remind him of it? But every fat man’s labelled as a matter of 
course I’m the type that people automatically slap on the back and punch m 
the ribs, and nearly all of them think I like it I never go into the saloon bar of 
the Crown at Pudley (I pass that way once a week on business) without that ass 
Waters, who travels for the Seafoam Soap people but who’s more or less a 
permanency m the saloon bar of the Crown, prodding me m the ribs and 
singing out ‘Here a sheer hulk lies poor Tom Bowling’’ which is a joke the 
bloody fools m the bar never get tired of Waters has got a finger like a bar of 
iron They all think a fat man doesn’t have any feelings 

The commercial took another of my matches, to pick his teeth with, and 
chucked the box back The tram whizzed on to an iron bridge Down below I 
got a glimpse of a baker’s van and a long string of lorries loaded with cement 
The queer thing, I was thinking, is that m a way they’re right about fat men 
It’s a fact that a fat man, particularly a man who’s been fat from birth-from 
childhood, that’s to say-isn’t quite like other men He goes through his life on 
a different plane, a sort of light-comedy plane, though in the case of blokes in 
side-shows at fairs, or in fact anyone over twenty stone, it isn’t so much light 
comedy as low farce I’ve been both fat and thin m my life, and I know the 
difference fatness makes to your outlook It kind of prevents you from taking 
things too hard I doubt whether a man who’s never been anything but fat, a 
man who’s been called Fatty ever since he could walk, even knows of the 
existence of any really deep emotions How could he’ He’s got no experience of 
such things He can’t ever be present at a tragic scene, because a scene where 
there’s a fat man present isn’t tragic, it’s comic Just imagine a fat Hamlet, for 
instance 1 Or Oliver Hardy acting Romeo Funnily enough I’d been thinking 
something of the kind only a few days earlier when I was reading a novel I’d 
got out of Boots Wasted Passion , it was called The chap in the story finds out 
that his girl has gone off with another chap. He’s one of these chaps you read 
about m novels, that have pale sensitive faces and dark hair and a private 
income. I remember more or less how the passage went 

David paced up and down the room, his hands pressed to his forehead The news seemed to have 
stunned him For a long time he could not believe it Sheila untrue to him* It could not be' 
Suddenly realization rushed over him, and he saw the fact in all its stark horror It was too much 
He flung himself down in a paroxysm of weeping 

Anyway, it went something like that And even at the time it started me 
thinking There you have it, you see That’s how people-some people-are 
expected to behave But how about a chap like me’ Suppose Hilda went off for 
a week-end with somebody else-not that I’d care a damn, m fact it would 
rather please me to find that she’d still got that much kick left in her-but 
suppose I did care, would I fling myself down in a paroxysm of weeping’ 
Would anyone expect me to’ You couldn’t, with a figure like mme It would be 
downright obscene. 

Thetfain was running along an embankment A little below us you could see 
theroofs of the houses stretching on and on, the little red roofs where the 



Coming up for Air 441 

bombs are going to drop, a bit lighted up at this moment because a ray of 
sunshine was catching them Funny how we keep on thinking about bombs Of 
course there’s no question that it’s coming soon You can tell how close it is by 
the cheer-up stuff they’re talking about it m the newspaper I was reading a 
piece m the News Chronicle the other day where it said that bombing planes 
can’t do any damage nowadays The anti-aircraft guns have got so good that 
the bomber has to stay at twenty thousand feet The chap thinks* you notice, 
that if an aeroplane’s high enough the bombs don’t reach the ground Or more 
likely what he really meant was that they’ll miss Woolwich Arsenal and only 
hit places like Ellesmere Road 

But taking it by and large, I thought, it’s not so bad to be fat One thing 
about a fat man is that he’s always popular There’s really no kind of company, 
from bookies to bishops, where a fat man doesn’t fit m and feel at home As for 
women, fat men have more luck with them than people seem to think It’s all 
bunk to imagine, as some people do, that a woman looks on a fat man as just a 
joke The truth is that a woman doesn’t look on any man as a joke if he can kid 
her that he’s m love with her 

Mind you, I haven’t always been fat I’ve been fat for eight or nine years, 
and I suppose I’ve developed most of the characteristics But it’s also a fact 
that internally, mentally. I’m not altogether fat No' Don’t mistake me I’m 
not trying to put myself over as a kind of tender flower, the achmg heart behind 
the smiling face and so forth You couldn’t get on m the insurance business if 
you were anything like that I’m vulgar, I’m insensitive, and I fit m with my 
environment So long as anywhere m the world things are being sold on 
commission and livings are picked up by sheer brass and lack of finer feelings, 
chaps like me will be doing it In almost all circumstances I’d manage to make a 
Iivmg-always a living and never a fortune-and even m war, revolution, 
plague, and famine I’d back myself to stay alive longer than most people I’m 
that type. But also I’ve got something else inside me, chiefly a hangover from 
the past I’ll tell you about that later I’m fat, but I’m thin inside. Has it ever 
struck you that there’s a thm man inside every fat man, just as they say there’s a 
statue inside every block of stone’ 

The chap who’d borrowed my matches was having a good pick at his teeth 
over the Express 

‘Legs case don’t seem to get much forrader,’ he said, 

‘They’ll never get ’im,’ said the other ‘ ’Ow could you identify a pair of legs? 
They’re all the bleeding same, aren’t they’’ 

‘Might trace ’im through the piece of paper ’e wrapped ’em up m,’ said the 
first, 

Down below you could see the roofs of the houses stretching on and on, 
twisting this way and that with the streets, but stretching on and on, like an 
enormous plain that you could have ridden over. Whichever way you cross 
London it’s twenty miles of houses almost without a break. Chnst! how can the 
bombers miss uswhen they come’ We’te just one great big bull’s-eye And no 
warning, probably Because who’s going to be such a bloody fool as to declare 
war nowadays’ If I Hitler I’d send my bombers across in the middle Of a 



442 Coming up for Air 

disarmament conference Some quiet morning, when the clerks are streaming 
across London Bridge, and the canary’s singing, and the old woman’s pegging 
the bloomers on the line-zoom, whizz, plonk' Houses going up into the air, 
bloomers soaked with blood, canary smging on above the corpses 

Seems a pity somehow, I thought I looked at the great sea of roofs 
stretching on and on Miles and miles of streets, fried-fish shops, tin chapels, 
picture houses, little printing-shops up back alleys, factories, blocks of flats, 
whelk stalls, dairies, power stations -on and on and on Enormous' And the 
peacefulness of it' Like a great wilderness with no wild beasts No guns firing, 
nobody chucking pineapples, nobody beating anybody else up with a rubber 
truncheon If you come to think of it, in the whole of England at this moment 
there probably isn’t a single bedroom wmdow from which anyone’s firing a 
machine-gun 

But how about five years from now? Or two years? Or one year? 


4 


I’d dropped my papers at the office Warner is one of these cheap American 
dentists, and he has his consulting-room, or ‘parlour’ as he likes to call it, half- 
way up a big block of offices, between a photographer and a rubber-goods 
wholesaler I was early for my appointment, but it was time for a bit of grub I 
don’t know what put it into my head to go into a milk-bar They’re places I 
generally avoid We five-to-ten-pound-a-weekers aren’t well served in the way 
of eatmg-places in London If your idea of the amount to spend on a meal is 
one and threepence, it’s either Lyons, the Express Dairy, or the A B C , or else 
it’s the kind of funeral snack they serve you in the saloon bar, a pint pf bitter 
and a slab of cold pie, so cold that it’s colder than the beer Outside the milk- 
bar the boys were yelhng the first editions of the evening papers 
Behind the bright red counter a girl in a tall white cap was fiddling with an 
ice-box, and somewhere at the back a radio was playing, plonk-tiddle-tiddle- 
plonk, a kind of tinny sound. Why the hell am I coming here? I thought to 
myself as I went in There’s a kind of atmosphere about these places that gets 
me down. Everything slick and shiny and streamlined, mirrors, enamel, and 
chromium plate whichever direction you look in Everything spent on the 
decorations and nothing on the food No real food at all Just lists of stuff with 
American names, sort of phantom stuff that you can’t taste and can hardly 
believe in the existence of Everything comes out of a carton or a tin, or it’s 
hauled out of a refrigerator or squirted out of a tap or squeezed out of a tube. 
No comfort, no privacy. Tall stools to sit on, a kind of narrow ledge to eat off, 
mirrors all round you A sort of propaganda floating round, mixed up with the 
noise of the radio, to the effect that food doesn’t matter, comfort doesn’t 



Coming up for Atr 44 5 

matter, nothing matters except slickness and shimness and streamlining 
Everything’s streamlined nowadays, even the bullet Hitler’s keeping for you I 
ordered a large coffee and a couple of frankfurters The girl m the white cap 
jerked them at me with about as much interest as you’d throw ants’ eggs to a 
goldfish 

Outside the door a newsboy yelled ‘Starnoosstannerd'’ I saw the poster 
flapping against his knees legs fresh discoveries Just ‘legs’, you notice It 
had got down to that Two days earlier they’d found a woman’s legs m a 
railway waiting-room, done up in a brown-paper parcel, and what with 
successive editions of the papers, the whole nation was supposed to be so 
passionately interested m these blasted legs that they didn’t need any further 
introduction They were the only legs that were news at the moment It’s 
queer, I 'thought, as I ate a bit of roll, how dull the murders are getting 
nowadays All this cutting people up and leaving bits of them about the 
countryside Not a patch on the old domestic poisoning dramas, Cnppen, 
Seddon, Mrs Maybnck, the truth being, I suppose, that you can’t do a good 
murder unless you believe you’re going to roast m hell for it 
At this moment I bit into one of my frankfurters, and-Christ' 

I can’t honestly say that I’d expected the thing to have a pleasant taste I’d 
expected it to taste of nothing, like the roll But this-well, it was quite an 
experience Let me try and describe it to you 
The frankfurter had a rubber skin, of course, and my temporary teeth 
weren’t much of a fit I had to do a kind of sawing movement before I could get 
my teeth through the skin And then suddenly-pop' The thing burst in my 
mouth like a rotten pear A sort of horrible soft stuff was oozing all over my 
tongue But the taste 1 For a moment I just couldn’t believe it Then I rolled my 
tonge round it again and had another try It was fish' A sausage, a thing calling 
itself a frankfurter, filled with fish 1 I got up and walked straight out without 
touching my coffee, God knows what that might have tasted of 

Outside the newsboy shoved the Standard into my face and yelled, ‘Legs' 
’Orrible revelations' All the winners' Legs' Legs'’ I was still rolling the stuff 
round my tongue, wondering where I could spit it out, I remembered a bit I’d 
read in the paper somewhere about these food-factories m Germany where 
everything’s made out of something else. Ersatz, they call it I remembered 
reading that they were making sausages out of fish, and fish, no doubt, out of 
something different It gave me the feelmg that I’d bitten into the modern 
world and discovered what it was really made of That’s the way we’re going 
nowadays. Everything slick and streamlined, everything made out of 
something else Celluloid, rubber, chromium-steel everywhere, arc-lamps 
blazing all night, glass roofs over your head, radios all playing the same tune, 
no vegetation left, everything cemented over, mock-turtles grazing under the 
neutral fruit-trees But when you come down to brass tacks and get your teeth 
into something solid, a sausage for instance, that’s what you get. Rotten fish m 
a rubber skin. Bombs of filth Bursting inside your mouth. 

When I’d got the new teeth m I felt a lot better. They sat mce and smooth 
over the gums, and though very likely it sounds absurd to say that false teeth 



444 Coming up for Air 

can make you feel younger, it’s a fact that they did so I tried a smile at myself 
m a shop window They weren’t half bad Warner, though cheap, is a bit of an 
artist and doesn’t aim at making you look like a toothpaste advert He’s got 
huge cabinets full of false teeth-he showed them to me once-all graded 
according to size and colour, and he picks them out like a jeweller choosing 
stones for a necklace Nine people out of ten would have taken my teeth for 
natural 

I caught a full-length glimpse of myself m another window I was passing, 
and it struck me that really I wasn’t such a bad figure of a man A bit on the fat 
side, admittedly, but nothing offensive, only what the tailors call a ‘full figure’, 
and some women like a man to have a red face There’s life in the old dog yet, I 
thought I remembered my seventeen quid, and definitely made up my mind 
that I’d spend it on a woman There was time to have a pint before the pubs 
shut, just to baptize the teeth, and feeling rich because of my seventeen quid I 
stopped at a tobacconist’s and bought myself a sixpenny cigar of a kind I’m 
rather partial to They’re eight inches long and guaranteed pure Havana leaf all 
through I suppose cabbages grow in Havana the same as anywhere else 

When I came out of the pub I felt qmte different 

I’d had a couple of pints, they’d warmed me up inside, and the cigar smoke 
oozing round my new teeth gave me a fresh, clean, peaceful sort of feeling All 
of a sudden I felt kind of thoughtful and philosophic It was partly because I 
didn’t have any work to do My mind went back to the thoughts of war I’d been 
having earlier that morning, when the bomber flew over the tram I felt in a 
kind of prophetic mood, the mood m which you foresee the end of the world 
and get a certain kick out of it 

I was walking westward up the Strand, and though it was coldish I went 
slowly to get the pleasure of my cigar The usual crowd that you can hardly 
fight your way through was streaming up the pavement, all of them with that 
insane fixed expression on their faces that people have m London streets, and 
there was the usual jam of traffic with the great red buses nosing their way 
between the cars, and the engines roarmg and horns tooting Enough noise to 
waken the dead, but not to waken this lot, I thought. I felt as if I was the only 
person awake m a city of sleep-walkers That’s an illusion, of course When 
you walk through a crowd of strangers it’s next door to impossible not to 
imagine that they’re all waxworks, but probably they’re thinking just the same 
about you And this kind of prophetic feeling that keeps coming over me 
nowadays, the feeling that war’s just round the corner and that war’s the end of 
all things, isn’t peculiar to me We’ve all got it, more or less I suppose even 
among the people passing at that moment there must have been chaps who 
were seeing mental pictures of the shellbursts and the mud Whatever thought 
you think there’s always a million people thinking it at the same moment But 
that was how I felt. We’re all on the burning deck and nobody knows it except 
me. I looked at the dumb-bell faces streaming past Like turkeys m November, 
I thought, Npt a notion of what’s coming to them. It was as if I’d got X-rays m 
my eyes and could see the skeletons walking 

i l looked forward a few years I saw this street as it’ll be m five years’ time, 



Coming up for Air 44s 

say, or three years’ time (1941 they say it’s booked for), after the fighting’s 
started 

Mo, not all smashed to pieces Only a little altered, kind of chipped and 
dirty-looking, the shop-windows almost empty and so dusty that you can’t see 
into them Down a side street there’s an enormous bomb-crater and a block of 
buildings burnt out so that it looks like a hollow tooth Thermite It’s all 
curiously quiet, and everyone’s very thin A platoon of soldiers comes 
marching up the street They’re all as thin as rakes and their boots are 
dragging The sergeant’s got corkscrew moustaches and holds himself like a 
ramrod, but he’s thm too and he’s got a cough that almost tears him open 
Between his coughs he’s trymg to bawl at them in the old parade-ground style 
£ Nah then, Jones 1 Lift yer ’ed up 1 What yer keep starin’ at the ground for'* All 
them fag-ends was picked up years ago ’ Suddenly a fit of coughing catches 
him He tries to stop it, can’t, doubles up like a ruler, and almost coughs his 
guts out His face turns pmk and purple, his moustache goes limp, and the 
water runs out of his eyes 

I can hear the air-raid sirens blowing and the loud-speakers bellowing that 
our glorious troops have taken a hundred thousand prisoners I see a top-floor- 
back m Birmingham and a child of five howlmg and howling for a bit of bread 
And suddenly the mother can’t stand it any longer, and she yells at it, ‘Shut 
your trap, you little bastard!’ and then she ups the child’s frock and smacks its 
bottom hard, because there isn’t any bread and isn’t going to be any bread I 
see it all I see the posters and the food-queues, and the castor oil and the 
rubber truncheons and the machine-guns squirting out of bedroom windows 

Is it going to happen? No knowing Some days it’s impossible to believe it 
Some days I say to myself that it’s just a scare got up by the newspapers Some 
days I know m my bones there’s no escapmg it 

When I got down near Charing Cross the boys were yelling a later edition of 
the evemng papers There was some more drivel about the murder legs 
famous surgeon’s statement Then another poster caught my eye king 
zog’s wedding postponed King Zog f What a name 1 It’s next door to 
impossible to believe a chap with a name like that isn’t a jet-black Negro 

But just at that moment a queer thing happened King Zog’s name-but I 
suppose, as I’d already seen the name several times that day, it was mixed up 
with some sound in the traffic or the smell of horse-dung or something-had 
started memories in me 

The past is a curious thing It’s with you all the time I suppose an hour 
never passes without your thinking of things that happened ten or twenty years 
ago, and yet most of the time it’s got no reality, it’s just a set of facts that you’ve 
learned, like a lot of stuff in a history book Then some chance sight or sound or 
smell, especially smell, sets you going, and the past doesn’t merely come back 
to you, you’re actually in the past It was like that at this moment. 

I was back in the parish church at Lower Binfield, and it was thirty-eight 
years ago To outward appearances, I suppose, I was still walking down the 
Strand, fat and forty-five, with false teeth and a bowler hat, but mside me I was 
Georgia Bowling, aged seven, younger son of Samuel Bowling, com and seed 



446 Corning up for Air 

merchant, of 57 High Street, Lower Bmfield And it was Sunday morning, and 
I could smell the church How I could smell it 1 You know the smell churches 
have, a peculiar, dank, dusty, decaying, sweetish sort of smell There’s a touch 
of candle-grease in it, and perhaps a whiff of incense and a suspicion of mice, 
and on Sunday mornings it’s a bit overlaid by yellow soap and serge dresses, 
but predominantly it’s that sweet, dusty, musty smell that’s like the smell of 
death and life mixed up together It’s powdered corpses, really 
In those days I was about four feet high I was standing on the hassock so as 
to see over the pew m front, and I could feel Mother’s black serge dress under 
my hand I could also feel my stockings pulled up over my knees-we used to 
wear them like that then-and the saw edge of the Eton collar they used to 
buckle me mto on Sunday mornings And I could hear the organ wheezing and 
two enormous voices bellowing out the psalm In our church there were two 
men who led the singing, m fact they did so much of the singing that nobody 
else got much of a chance One was Shooter, the fishmonger, and the other was 
old Wetherall, the joiner and undertaker They used to sit opposite one 
another on either side of the nave, m the pews nearest the pulpit Shooter was a 
short fat man with a very pink, smooth face, a big nose, drooping moustache, 
and a chm that kind of fell away beneath his mouth Wetherall was quite 
different He was a great, gaunt, powerful old devil of about sixty, with a face 
like a death’s-head and stiff grey hair half an inch long all over his head I’ve 
never seen a living man who looked so exactly like a skeleton. You could see 
every line of the skull m his face, his skm was like parchment, and his great 
lantern jaw full of yellow teeth worked up and down just like the jaw of a 
skeleton m an anatomical museum And yet with all his leanness he looked as 
strong as iron, as though he’d live to be a hundred and make coffins for 
everyone in that church before he’d finished Their voices were quite different, 
too Shooter had a kind of desperate, agomzed bellow, as though someone had 
a knife at his throat and he was just letting out his last yell for help But 
Wetherall had a tremendous, churning, rumbling noise that happened deep 
down inside him, like enormous barrels bemg rolled to and fro underground 
However much noise he let out, you always knew he’d got plenty more in 
reserve The kids nicknamed him Rumbletummy 
They used to get up a kind of antiphonal effect, especially m the psalms It 
was always Wetherall who had the last word I suppose really they were friends 
m private life, but in my kid’s way I used to imagine that they were deadly 
enemies and trying to shout one another down Shooter would roar out ‘The 
Lord is my shepherd’, and then Wetherall would come in with ‘Therefore can 
I lack nothing’, drowning him completely. You always knew which of the two 
was master I used especially to look forward to that psalm that has the bit 
about Sihon king of the Amorites and Qg the king of Bashan (this was what 
King Zog’s name had reminded me of) Shooter would start off with ‘Sihon 
ling of the Amontes’, then perhaps for half a second you could hear the rest of 
singing the ‘and’, and then Wetherall’s enormous bass would 
eome inlike a tidal wave and swallow everybody up with ‘Og the king of 
-llaaban’. I wish I could make you hear the tremendous, rumbling, 



Coming up for Air 447 

subterranean barrel-noise that he could get mto that word ‘Og’ He even used 
to clip off the end of the ‘and’, so that when I was a very small kid I used to 
think it was Dog the king of Bashan But later, when I got the names right, I 
formed a picture m my mind’s eye of Sihon and Og I saw them as a couple of 
those great Egyptian statues that I’d seen pictures of m the penny 
encyclopedia, enormous stone statues thirty feet high, sitting on their thrones 
opposite one another, with their hands on their knees and a faint mysterious 
smile on their faces 

How it came back to me 1 That peculiar feehng-it was only a feeling, you 
couldn’t describe it as an activity-that we used to call ‘Church’ The sweet 
corpsy smell, the rustle of Sunday dresses, the wheeze of the organ and the 
roaring voices, the spot of light from the hole in the window creeping slowly up 
the nave In some way the grown-ups could put it across that this 
extraordinary performance was necessary You took it for granted, just as you 
took the Bible, which you got in big doses m those days There were texts on 
every wall and you knew whole chapters of the O T by heart Even now my 
head’s stuffed full of bits out of the Bible And the children of Israel did evil 
again in the sight of the Lord And Asher abode in his breeches Followed 
them from Dan until thou come unto Beersheba Smote him under the fifth 
rib, so that he died You never understood it, you didn’t try to or want to, it 
was just a kind of medicine, a queer-tastmg stuff that you had to swallow and 
knew to be in some way necessary An extraordinary rigmarole about people 
with names like Shimei and Nebuchadnezzar and Ahithophel and Hash- 
badada, people with long stiff garments and Assyrian beards, riding up and 
down on camels among temples and cedar trees and doing extraordinary 
things Sacrificing burnt offerings, walking about m fiery furnaces, getting 
nailed on crosses, getting swallowed by whales And all mixed up with the 
sweet graveyard smell and the serge dresses and the wheeze of the organ 

That was the world I went back to when I saw the poster about King Zog 
For a moment I didn’t merely remember it, I was m it Of course such 
impressions don’t last more than a few seconds A moment later it was as 
though I’d opened my eyes again, and I was forty-five and there was a traffic 
jam in the Strand But it had left a kind of after-effect behind Sometimes when 
you come out of a train of thought you feel as if you were coming up from deep 
water, but this time it was the other way about, it was as though it was back m 
1900 that I’d been breathmg real air Even now, with my eyes open, so to 
speak, all those bloody fools hustling to and fro, and the posters and the petrol- 
stmk and the roar of the engines, seemed to me less real than Sunday morning 
in Lower Bmfield thirty-eight years ago 

I chucked away my cigar and walked on slowly I could smell the corpse- 
smell In a manner of speaking I can smell it now I’m back in Lower Bmfield, 
and the year’s 1900 Beside the horse-trough in the market-place the carrier’s 
horse is having its nose-bag At the sweet-shop on the comer Mother Wheeler 
is weighing out a ha’porth of brandy balls Lady Rampling’s carriage is driving 
by, with the tiger sitting behind in his pipeclayed breeches with his arms 
folded Uncle Ezekiel is cursing Joe Chamberlain The recruiting-sergeant in 



448 Coming up for Air 

his scarlet jacket, tight blue overalls, and pillbox hat, is strutting up and down 
twisting his moustache The drunks are puking in the yard behind the George 
Vicky’s at Windsor, God’s in heaven, Christ’s on the cross, Jonah’s m the 
whale, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego are in the fiery furnace, and Sihon 
king of the Amontes and Og the king of Bashan are sitting on their thrones 
looking at one another-not doing anything exactly, just existing, keeping their 
appointed place, like a couple of fire-dogs, or the Lion and the Unicorn 
Is it gone for ever? I’m not certain But I tell you it was a good world to live 
in I belong to it So do you 



PART II 


i 


The world I momentarily remembered when I saw King Zog’s name on the 
poster was so different from the world I live in now that you might have a bit of 
difficulty in believing I ever belonged to it 

I suppose by this time you’ve got a kind of picture of me in your mmd-a fat 
middle-aged bloke with false teeth and a red face-and subconsciously you’ve 
been imagining that I was just the same even when I was in my cradle But 
forty-five years is a long time, and though some people don’t change and 
develop, others do I’ve changed a great deal, and I’ve had my ups and downs, 
mostly ups It may seem queer, but my father would probably be rather proud 
of me if he could see me now He’d think it a wonderful thing that a son of his 
should own a motor-car and live in a house with a bathroom Even now I’m a 
little above my origin, and at other times I’ve touched levels that we should 
never have dreamed of in those old days before the war 

Before the war' How long shall we go on saying that, I wonder^ How long 
before the answer will be ‘Which war-*’ In my case the never-never land that 
people are thinking of when they say ‘before the war’ might almost be before 
the Boer War I was born m ’93, and I can actually remember the outbreak of 
the Boer War, because of the first-class row that Father and Uncle Ezekiel had 
about it. I’ve several other memories that would date from about a year earlier 
than that 

The very first thing I remember is the smell of sainfoin chaff You went up 
the stone passage that led from the kitchen to the shop, and the smell of 
sainfoin got stronger all the way Mother had fixed a wooden gate m the 
doorway to prevent Joe and myself (Joe was my elder brother) from getting 
into the shop I can still remember standing there clutching the bars, and the 
smell of sainfoin mixed up with the damp plastery smell that belonged to the 
passage. It wasn’t till years later that X somehow managed to crash the gate and 
get into the shop when nobodywas there Amouse that had been having a go at 
one of the meal-bins suddenly flopped out and ran between my feet It was 
quite white with meal. This must have happened when I was about six. 

, When you’re very young you seem to suddenly become conscious of things 




450 Coming up for Air 

that have been under your nose for a long time past The things round about 
you swim into your mind one at a time, rather as they do when you’re waking 
from sleep For instance, it was only when I was nearly four that I suddenly 
reali2ed that we owned a dog Nailer, his name was, an old white English 
terrier of the -breed that’s gone out nowadays I met him under the kitchen 
table and m some way seemed to grasp, having only learnt it that moment, that 
he belonged to us and that his name was Nailer In the same way, a bit earlier. 
I’d discovered that beyond the gate at the end of the passage there was a place 
where the smell of sainfoin came from And the shop itself, with the huge 
scales and the wooden measures and the tin shovel, and the white lettering on 
the window, and the bullfinch m its cage-which you couldn’t see very well 
even from the pavement, because the window was always dusty-all these 
things dropped mto place in my mind one by one, like bits of a jig-saw puzzle 

Time goes on, you get stronger on your legs, and by degrees you begin to get 
a grasp of geography I suppose Lower Binfield was just like any other market 
town of about two thousand inhabitants It was in Oxfordshire-I keep saying 
was, you notice, though after all the place still exists-about five miles from the 
Thames It lay in a bit of a valley, with a low ripple of hills between itself and 
the Thames, and higher hills behind On top of the hills there were woods m 
sort of dim blue masses among which you could see a great white house with a 
colonnade This was Binfield House (‘The Hall’, everybody called it), and the 
top of the hill was known as Upper Binfield, though there was no village there 
and hadn’t been for a hundred years or more I must have been nearly seven 
before I noticed the existence of Binfield House When you’re very small you 
don’t look mto the distance But by that time I knew every inch of the town, 
which was shaped roughly like a cross with the market-place in the middle 
Our shop was in the High Street a little before you got to the market-place, and 
on the comer there was Mrs Wheeler’s sweet-shop where you spent a 
halfpenny when you had one Mother Wheeler was a dirty old witch and 
people suspected her of sucking the bull’s-eyes and putting them back in the 
bottle, though this was never proved Farther down there was the barber’s 
shop with the advert for Abdulla cigarettes-the one with the Egyptian soldiers 
on it, and curiously enough they’re using the same advert to this day-and the 
rich boozy smell of bay rum and latakia Behind the houses you could see the 
chimneys of the brewery In the middle of the market-place there was the stone 
horse-trough, and on top of the water there was always a fine film of dust and 
chaff 

Before the war, and especially before the Boer War, it was summer all the 
year round I’m quite aware that that’s a delusion I’m merely trying to tell you 
how things come back to me. If I shut my eyes and think of Lower Binfield any 
time before I was, say, eight, it’s always in summer weather that I remember it 
Either it’s the market-place at dinner-time, with a sort of sleepy dusty hush 
over everything and the earner’s horse with his nose dug well mto his nose- 
bag, munching away, or it’s a hot afternoon in the great green juicy meadows 
round the town, or it’s about dusk in the lane behind the allotments, and 
there’s a smell of pipe-tobacco and night-stocks floating through the hedge 



Coming up for Air 451 

But m a sense I do remember different seasons, because all my memories are 
bound up with things to eat, which varied at different times of the year 
Especially the things you used to find in the hedges In July there were 
dewberries-but they’re very rare-and the blackberries were getting red 
enough to eat In September there were sloes and hazel-nuts The best hazel- 
nuts were always out of reach Later on there were beech-nuts and crab- 
apples Then there were the kind of minor foods that you used to eat when 
there was nothing better going Haws-but they’re not much good-and hips, 
which have a nice sharp taste if you clean the hairs out of them Angelica is 
good in early summer, especially when you’re thirsty, and so are the stems of 
various grasses Then there’s sorrel, which is good with bread and butter, and 
pig-nuts, and a kind of wood shamrock which has a sour taste. Even plantain 
seeds are better than nothing when you’re a long way from home and very 
hungry 

Joe was two years older than myself When we were very small Mother used 
to pay Katie Simmons eighteen pence a week to take us out for walks in the 
afternoons Katie’s father worked m the brewery and had fourteen children, so 
that the family were always on the lookout for odd jobs She was only twelve 
when Joe was seven and I was five, and her mental level wasn’t very different 
from ours She used to drag me by the arm and call me ‘Baby’, and she had just 
enough authority over us to prevent us from being run over by dogcarts or 
chased by bulls, but so far as conversation went we were almost on equal terms 
We used to go for long, trailing kind of walks-always, of course, picking and 
eating things all the way-down the lane past the allotments, across Roper’s 
Meadows, and down to the Mill Farm, where there was a pool with newts and 
tmy carp in it (Joe and I used to go fishing there when we were a bit older), and 
back by the Upper Bmfield Road so as to pass the sweet-shop that stood on the 
edge of the town This shop was m such a bad position that anyone who took it 
went bankrupt, and to my own knowledge it was three times a sweet-shop, 
once a grocer’s, and once a bicycle-repair shop, but it had a peculiar fascination 
for children Even when we had no money, we’d go that way so as to glue our 
noses against the window Katie wasn’t m the least above sharing a farthing’s 
worth of sweets and quarrelling over her share You could buy things worth 
having for a farthing m those days. Most sweets were four ounces a penny, and 
there was even some stuff called Paradise Mixture, mostly broken sweets from 
other bottles, which was six. Then there were Farthing Everlastings, which 
were a yard longhand couldn’t be finished inside half an hour. Sugar mice and 
sugar pigs were eight a penny, and so were liquorice pistols, popcorn was a 
halfpenny for a large bag, and a prize packet which contained several different 
kinds of sweets, a gold ring, and sometimes a whistle, was a penny You don’t 
see prize packets nowadays A whole lot of the kinds of sweets we had m those 
days have gone out There was a kind of flat white sweet with mottoes printed 
on them, and also a kind of sticky pink stuff in an oval matchwood box with a 
tiny tin spoon to eat it with, which cost a halfpenny. Both of those have 
disappeared So have Caraway Comfits, and so have chocolate pipes and sugar 
matches, and even Hundreds and Thousands you hardly ever see. Hundreds 



45 2 Coming up for Air 

and Thousands were a great standby when you’d only a farthing And what 
about Penny Monsters^ Does one ever see a Penny Monster nowadays ^ 1 It was 
a huge bottle, holding more than a quart of fizzy lemonade, all for a penny 
That’s another thing that the war killed stone dead 
It always seems to be summer when I look back I can feel the grass round 
me as tall as myself, and the heat coming out of the earth And the dust in the 
lane, and the warm greeny light coming through the hazel boughs I can see the 
three of us trailing along, eating stuff out of the hedge, with Katie dragging at 
my arm and saying ‘Come on, Baby 1 ’ and sometimes yelling ahead to Joe, ‘Joel 
You come back ’ere this minute' You’ll catch it ' 5 Joe was a hefty boy with a big, 
lumpy sort of head and tremendous calves, the kmd of boy who’s always doing 
something dangerous At seven he’d already got into short trousers, with the 
thick black stockings drawn up over the knee and the great clumping boots that 
boys had to wear m those days I was still in frocks-a kmd of holland overall 
that Mother used to make for me Katie used to wear a dreadful ragged parody 
of a grown-up dress that descended from sister to sister in her family She had 
a ridiculous great hat with her pigtails hanging down behind it, and a long, 
draggled skirt which trailed on the ground, and button boots with the heels 
trodden down She was a tmy thing, not much taller than Joe, but not bad at 
‘minding’ children In a family like that a child is ‘minding’ other children 
about as soon as it’s weaned At times she’d try to be grown-up and ladylike, 
and she had a way of cutting you short with a proverb, which to her mind was 
something unanswerable If you said ‘Don’t care’, she’d answer immediately 

‘Don’t care was made to care. 

Don’t care was hung, 

Don’t care was put in a pot 

And boiled till he was done ’ 

Or if you called her names it would be ‘Hard words break no bones’, or, when 
you’d been boasting, ‘Pride comes before a fall’ This came very true one day 
when I was strutting along pretending to be a soldier and fell into a cowpat 
Her family lived in a filthy little rat-hole of a place m the slummy street behind 
the brewery The place swarmed with children like a kind of vermin The 
whole family had managed to dodge going to school, which was fairly easy to 
do m those days, and started running errands and doing other odd jobs as soon 
as they could walk. One of the elder brothers got a month for stealing turnips 
She stopped taking us out for walks a year later when Joe was eight and getting 
too tough for a girl to handle. He’d discovered that in Katie’s home they slept 
five m a bed, and used to tease the life out of her about it 
Poor Katie! She had her first baby when she was fifteen No one knew who 
was the father, and probably Katie wasn’t too certain herself Most people 
believe it was one of her brothers. The workhouse people took the baby, and 
Katie went mto service ip Walton Some time afterwards she married a tinker, 
which even by the standards of her family was a come-down The last time I 
sawherwas in 1913* I was biking through Walton, and 1 passed some dreadful 
wooden shacks beside the railway line, with fences round them made out of 



Coming up for Air 453 

barrel-staves, where the gypsies used to camp at certain times of the year, 
when the police would let them A wrinkled-up hag of a woman, with her hair 
coming down and a smoky face, looking at least fifty years old, came out of one 
of the huts and began shaking out a rag mat It was Katie, who must have been 
twenty-seven 


2 


Thursday was market day Chaps with round red faces like pumpkins and 
dirty smocks and huge boots covered with dry cow-dung, carrying long hazel 
switches, used to drive their brutes into the market-place early in the mormng. 
For hours there’d be a terrific hullabaloo dogs barking, pigs squealing, chaps 
in tradesmen’s vans who wanted to get through the crush cracking their whips 
and cursing, and everyone who had anything to do with the cattle shouting and 
throwing sticks The big noise was always when they brought a bull to market 
Even at that age it struck me that most of the bulls were harmless law-abiding 
brutes that only wanted to get to their stalls in peace, but a bull wouldn’t have 
been regarded as a bull if half the town hadn’t had to turn out and chase it 
Sometimes some terrified brute, generally a half-grown heifer, used to break 
loose and charge down a side street, and then anyone who happened to be m 
the way would stand m the middle of the road and swmg his arms backwards 
like the sails of a windmill, shouting, ‘Woo' Woo*’ This was supposed to have a 
kind of hypnotic effect on an animal and certainly it did frighten them 
Half-way through the morning some of the farmers would come into the 
shop and run samples of seed through their fingers Actually Father did very 
little business with the farmers, because he had no delivery van and couldn’t 
afford to give long credits Mostly he did a rather petty class of busmess, 
poultry food and fodder for the tradesmen’s horses and so forth Old Brewer, 
of the Mill Farm, who was a stingy old bastard with a grey chin-beard, used to 
stand there for half an hour, fingering samples of chicken com and letting them 
drop into his pocket in an absent-minded manner, after which, of course, he 
finally used to make off without buymg anything In the evenings the pubs 
were full of drunken men In those days beer cost twopence a pint, and unlike 
the beer nowadays it had some guts in it All through the Boer War the 
recruiting sergeant used to be an the four-ale bar of the George every Thursday 
and Saturday night, dressed up to the nines and very free with his money. 
Sometimes next mormng you’d see him leading off some great sheepish, red- 
faced lump of a farm lad who’d taken the shilling when he was too drunk to see 
and found in the morning that it would cost him twenty pounds to get out of it. 
People used to stand in their doorways and shake then heads when they saw 
them go past, almost as if it had been a funeral, ‘Well now! Listed for a soldier! 



454 Coming up for Air 

Just think of it i A fine young fellow like that' 5 It just shocked them Listing for 
a soldier, in their eyes, was the exact equivalent of a girl’s going on the streets 
Their attitude to the war, and to the Army, was very curious They had the 
good old English notions that the red-coats are the scum of the earth and 
anyone who joins the Army will die of drink and go straight to hell, but at the 
same time they were good patriots, stuck Union Jacks in their windows, and 
held it as an article of faith that the English had never been beaten m battle and 
never could be At that time everyone, even the Nonconformists, used to sing 
sentimental songs about the thm red line and the soldier boy who died on the 
battlefield far away These soldier boys always used to die ‘when the shot and 
shell were flying’, I remember It puzzled me as a kid Shot I could 
understand, but it produced a queer picture m my mind to think of cockle- 
shells flying through the air When Mafeking was relieved the people nearly 
yelled the roof off, and there were at any rate times when they believed the tales 
about the Boers chucking babies into the air and skewering them on their 
bayonets Old Brewer got so fed up with the kids yelling ‘Krooger 1 ’ after him 
that towards the end of the war he shaved his beard off The people’s attitude 
towards the Government was really the same They were all true-blue 
Englishmen and swore that Vicky was the best queen that ever lived and 
foreigners were dirt, but at the same time nobody ever thought of paying a tax, 
not even a dog-licence, if there was any way of dodging it 
Before and after the war Lower Bmfield was a Liberal constituency During 
the war there was a by-election which the Conservatives won I was too young 
to grasp what it was all about, I only knew that I was a Conservative because I 
liked the blue streamers better than the red ones, and I chiefly remember it 
because of a drunken man who fell on his nose on the pavement outside the 
George In the general excitement nobody took any notice of him, and he lay 
there for hours in the hot sun with his blood drying round him, and when it 
dned it was purple By the time the 1906 election came along I was old enough 
to understand it, more or less, and this time I was a Liberal because everybody 
else was The people chased the Conservative candidate half a mile and threw 
him into a pond full of duckweed People took politics seriously in those days 
They used to begm storing up rotten eggs weeks before an election 
Very early m life, when the Boer War broke out, I remember the big row 
between Father and Uncle Ezekiel Uncle Ezekiel had a little boot-shop in one 
of the streets off the High Street, and also did some cobbling It was a small 
business and tended to get smaller, which didn’t matter greatly because Uncle 
Ezekiel wasn’t married. He was only a half-brother and much older than 
Father, twenty years older at least, and for the fifteen years or so that I knew 
him he always looked exactly the same. He was a fine-looking old chap, rather 
tall, with white hair and the whitest whiskers I ever saw- white as thistledown. 
He had a way of slapping his leather apron and standing up very straight-a 
reaction from bending over the last, I suppose-after which he’d bark his 
cpinions straight in your face, endmgup with a sort of ghostly cackle. He was a 
red old nineteenth-century Liberal, the kind that not only used to ask you 
what Gladstone said in ’78 but could tell you the answer, and one of the very 



Coming up for Air 455 

few people in Lower Binfield who stuck to the same opmions all through the 
war He was always denouncing Joe Chamberlain and some gang of people that 
he referred to as ‘the Park Lane riff-raff I can hear him now, having one of his 
arguments with Father ‘Them and their far-flung Empire 1 Can’t fling it too 
far for me He-he-he ! ’ And then Father’s voice, a quiet, worried, conscientious 
kind of voice, coming back at him with the white man’s burden and our dooty 
to the pore blacks whom these here Boars treated something shameful For a 
week or so after Uncle Ezekiel gave it out that he was a pro-Boer and a Little 
Englander they were hardly on speaking terms They had another row when 
the atrocity stories started Father was very worried by the tales he’d heard, 
and he tackled Uncle Ezekiel about it Little Englander or no, surely he 
couldn’t think it right for these here Boars to throw babies m the air and catch 
them on their bayonets, even if they were only nigger babies^ But Uncle 
Ezekiel just laughed m his face Father had got it all wrong 1 It wasn’t the Boars 
who threw babies in the air, it was the British soldiers 1 He kept grabbing hold 
of me - 1 must have been about five-to illustrate ‘Throw them in the air and 
skewer them like frogs, I tell you ! Same as I might throw this youngster here 1 ’ 
And then he’d swing me up and almost let go of me, and I had a vivid picture of 
myself flying through the air and landing plonk on the end of a bayonet 
Father was quite different from Uncle Ezekiel I don’t know much about my 
grandparents, they were dead before I was born, I only know that my 
grandfather had been a cobbler and late in life he married the widow of a 
seedsman, which was how we came to have the shop It was a job that didn’t 
really suit Father, though he knew the business inside out and was 
everlastingly working Except on Sunday and very occasionally on week-day 
evenings I never remember him without meal on the backs of his hands and m 
the lines of his face and in what was left of his hair He’d married when he was 
m his thirties and must have been nearly forty when I first remember him He 
was a small man, a sort of grey, quiet little man, always in shirtsleeves and 
white apron and always dusty-looking because of the meal He had a round 
head, a blunt nose, a rather bushy moustache, spectacles, and butter-coloured 
hair, the same colour as mine, but he’d lost most of it and it was always mealy 
My grandfather had bettered himself a good deal by marrying the seedsman’s 
widow, and Father had been educated at Walton Grammar School, where the 
farmers and the better-off tradesmen sent their sons, whereas Uncle Ezekiel 
liked to boast that he’d never been to school m his life and had taught himself 
to read by a tallow candle after working hours. But he was a much quicker- 
witted man than Father, he could argue with anybody, and he used to quote 
Carlyle and Spencer by the yard Father had a slow sort of mind, he’d never 
taken to ‘book-learning’, as he called it, and his English wasn’t good On 
Sunday afternoons, the only time when he really took things easy, he’d settle 
down by the parlour fireplace to have what he called a ‘good read’ at the 
Sunday paper, His favourite paper was The People-Mother preferred the 
News of the World , which she considered had more murders m it I can see 
them now A Sunday afternoon-summer, of course, always summer-a smell 
of roast pork and greens stiff floating m the Mr, and Mother on one side of the 



4 56 Coming up for Avr 

fireplace, starting off to read the latest murder but gradually falling asleep with 
her mouth open, and Father on the other, m slippers and spectacles, working 
his way slowly through the yards of smudgy print And the soft feeling of 
summer all round you, the geranium m the window, a starling cooing 
somewhere, and myself under the table with the B O P , making believe that 
the tablecloth is a tent Afterwards, at tea, as he chewed his way through the 
radishes and spring onions. Father would talk in a ruminative kind of way 
about the stuff he’d been reading, the fires and shipwrecks and scandals m high 
society, and these here new flying machmes and the chap (I notice that to this 
day he turns up in the Sunday papers about once m three years) who was 
swallowed by a whale m the Red Sea and taken out three days later, alive but 
bleached white by the whale’s gastric juice Father was always a bit sceptical of 
this story, and of the new flying machines, otherwise he believed everything he 
read Until 1909 no one in Lower Binfield believed that human beings would 
ever learn to fly The official doctrine was that if God had meant us to fly He’d 
have given us wings Uncle Ezekiel couldn’t help retortmg that if God had 
meant us to ride He’d have given us wheels, but even he didn’t beheve in the 
new flying machmes 

It was only on Sunday afternoons, and perhaps on the one evening a week 
when he looked m at the George for a half-pint, that Father turned his mind to 
such things At other times he was always more or less overwhelmed by 
business There wasn’t really such a lot to do, but he seemed to be always busy, 
either in the loft behmd the yard, struggling about with sacks and bales, or m 
the kind of dusty little cubby-hole behind the counter in the shop, adding 
figures up in a notebook with a stump of pencil He was a very honest man and 
a very obliging man, very anxious to provide good stuff and swindle nobody, 
which even in those days wasn’t the best way to get on m business. He would 
have been just the man for some small official job, a postmaster, for instance, or 
station-master of a country station But he hadn’t either the cheek and 
enterprise to borrow money and expand the business, or the imagination to 
think of new selling-lines It was characteristic of him that the only streak of 
imagination he ever showed, the invention of a new seed mixture for cage- 
birds (Bowling’s Mixture it was called, and it was famous over a radius of 
nearly five miles) was really due to Uncle Ezekiel Uncle Ezekiel was a bit of a 
bird-fancier and had quantities of goldfinches m his dark little shop It was his 
theory that cage-birds lose their colour because of lack of variation m their 
diet. In the yard behmd the shop Father had a tiny plot of ground in which he 
used to grow about twenty kinds of weed under wire-netting, and he used to 
dry them and mix their seeds with ordinary canary seed Jackie* the bullfinch 
who hung in* the shop-window, was supposed to be an advertisement for 
Bowling’s Mixture. Certainly* unlike most bullfinches in cages, Jackie never 
turned blade. 

Mother was fat ever tfuioe I remember her. No doubt it’s from her that I 
mfaerit my pituitary deficiency, or whatever it is that makes you get fat. 

Shewas alargish woman, abit taller than Father* with hair a good deal fairer 
than his and a tendency to wear black dresses. But except on Sundays I never 



Coming up for Air 457 

remember her without an apron It would be an exaggeration, but not a very 
big one, to say that I never remember her when she wasn’t cooking When you 
look back over a long period you seem to see human beings always fixed m 
some special place and some characteristic attitude It seems to you that they 
were always doing exactly the same thing Well, just as when I think of Father 
I remember him always behind the counter, with his hair all mealy, adding up 
figures with a stump of pencil which he moistens between his lips, and just as I 
remember Uncle Ezekiel, with his ghostly white whiskers, straightening 
himself out and slapping his leather apron, so when I think of Mother I 
remember her at the kitchen table, with her forearms covered with flour, 
rolhng out a lump of dough 

You know the kind of kitchen people had m those days A huge place, rather 
dark and low, with a great beam across the ceiling and a stone floor and cellars 
underneath Everything enormous, or so it seemed to me when I was a kid A 
vast stone sink which didn’t have a tap but an iron pump, a dresser covering 
one wall and gomg right up to the ceiling, a gigantic range which burned half a 
ton a month and took God knows how long to blacklead Mother at the table 
rolhng out a huge flap of dough And myself crawhng round, messing about 
with bundles of firewood and lumps of coal and tin beetle-traps (we had them 
m all the dark comers and they used to be baited with beer) and now and again 
coming up to the table to try and cadge a bit of food Mother ‘didn’t hold with’ 
eating between meals You generally got the same answer* ‘Get along with you, 
now* I’m not going to have you spoiling your dinner Your eye’s bigger than 
your belly.’ Very occasionally, however, she’d cut you off a thin strip of 
candied peel 

I used to like to watch Mother rolhng pastry There’s always a fascination in 
watching anybody do a job which he really understands Watch a woman-a 
woman who really knows how to cook, I mean-rolling dough She’s got a 
peculiar, solemn, indrawn air, a satisfied kind of air, like a priestess celebrating 
a sacred rite And m her own mind, of course, that’s exactly what she is 
Mother had thick, pink, strong forearms which were generally mottled with 
flour When she was cooking, all her movements were wonderfully precise and 
firm In her hands egg-whisks and mincers and rolhng-pins did exactly what 
they were meant to do When you saw her cooking you knew that she was in a 
world where she belonged, among things she really understood. Except 
through the Sunday papers and an occasional bit of gossip the outside world 
didn’t really exist for her. Although she read more easily than Father, and 
unlike him used to read novelettes as well as newspapers, she was unbelievably 
ignorant I realized this even by the time I was tan years old She certainly 
couldn’t have told you whether Ireland was east or west of England, and I 
doubt whether any time up to the outbreak of the Great War she could have 
told you who was Prime Minister Moreover she hadn’t the smallest wish to 
know such things Later on whan I read books abdut Eastern countries where 
they practise polygamy, and the seqret harems where the women are locked up 
with black eunuchs mounting guard over them, I used to think how shocked 
Mother wobld have been ifl *she’d heard of rt I can almost hear her 



4$8 Coming up for Air 

voice-‘Well, now' Shutting their wives up like that 1 The idea'’ Not that she’d 
have known what a eunuch was But m reality she lived her life m a space that 
must have been as small and almost as private as the average zenana Even m 
our own house there were parts where she never set foot She never went into 
the loft behind the yard and very seldom into the shop I don’t think I ever 
remember her serving a customer She wouldn’t have known where any of the 
things were kept, and until they were milled into flour she probably didn’t 
know the difference between wheat and oats Why should she? The shop was 
Father’s business, it was ‘the man’s work’, and even about the money side of it 
she hadn’t very much curiosity Her job, ‘the woman’s work’, was to look after 
the house and the meals and the laundry and the children She’d have had a fit 
if she’d seen Father or anyone else of the male sex trying to sew on a button for 
himself 

So far as the meals and so forth went, ours was one of those houses where 
everything goes like clockwork Or no, not like clockwork, which suggests 
something mechanical It was more like some kind of natural process You 
knew that breakfast would be on the table tomorrow morning m much the 
same way as you knew the sun would rise All through her life Mother went to 
bed at mne and got up at five, and she’d have thought it vaguely wicked-sort of 
decadent and foreign and aristocratic- to keep later hours Although she didn’t 
mmd paying Katie Simmons to take J oe and me out for walks, she would never 
tolerate the idea of havmg a woman m to help with the housework It was her 
firm belief that a hired woman always sweeps the dirt under the dresser Our 
meals were always ready on the tick Enormous meals-boiled beef and 
dumplings, roast beef and Yorkshire, boiled mutton and capers, pig’s head, 
apple pie, spotted dog, and jam roly-poly- with grace before and after. The old 
ideas about bringing up children still held good, though they were going out 
fast In theory children were still thrashed and put to bed on bread and water, 
and certainly you were liable to be sent away from table if you made too much 
noise eating, or choked, or refused something that was ‘good for you’, or 
‘answered back’ In practice there wasn’t much discipline m our family, and of 
the two Mother was the firmer. Father, though he was always quoting ‘Spare 
the rod and spoil the child’, was really much too weak with us, especially with 
Joe, who was a hard case from the start He was always ‘going to’ give Joe a 
good hiding, and he used to tell us stories, which I now believe were lies, about 
the frightful thrashings his own father used to give him with a leather strap, 
but nothing ever came of it By the time Joe was twelve he was too strong for 
Mother to get him across her knee, and after that there was no doing anything 
with him 

At that time it was still thought proper for parents to say ‘don’t’ to their 
children all day long You’d often hear a man boasting that he’d ‘thrash the life 
out oT his son if he caught liim smoking, or stealing apples, or robbing a bird’s 
nest. In some families thesefthrashings actually took place. Old Lovegrove, the 
saddler, caught his two$0n%great lumps aged sixteen and fifteen, smoking in 
fkhgardea shed and walieped. them so that yon oopld hear it all over the town 
Ij^vegrove was avnEfJheavy^mofeer. The thrashings never seemed to have any 



Corning up for Air 4 $9 

effect, all boys stole apples, robbed birds’ nests, and learned to smoke sooner 
or later, but the idea was still knocking around that children should be treated 
rough Practically everything worth doing was forbidden, m theory anyway 
According to Mother, everything that a boy ever wants to do was ‘dangerous’ 
Swimming was dangerous, climbing trees was dangerous, and so were sliding, 
snowballing, hanging on behind carts, using catapults and squailers, and even 
fishing All animals were dangerous, except Nailer, the two cats, and Jackie the 
bullfinch Every animal had its special recognized methods of attacking you 
Horses bit, bats got into your hair, earwigs got mto your ears, swans broke 
your leg with a blow of their wings, bulls tossed you, and snakes ‘stung’ All 
snakes stung, according to Mother, and when I quoted the penny encyclopedia 
to the effect that they didn’t sting but bit, she only told me not to answer back 
Lizards, slow-worms, toads, frogs, and newts also stung All insects stung, 
except flies and blackbeetles Practically all kinds of food, except the food you 
had at meals, were either poisonous or ‘bad for you’ Raw potatoes were deadly 
poison, and so were mushrooms unless you bought them at the greengrocer’s 
Raw gooseberries gave you colic and raw raspberries gave you a skm-rash If 
you had a bath after a meal you died of cramp, if you cut yourself between the 
thumb and forefinger you got lockjaw, and if you washed your hands m the 
water eggs were boiled m you got warts Nearly everything m the shop was 
poisonous, which was why Mother had put the gate m the doorway Cowcake 
was poisonous, and so was chicken corn, and so were mustard seed and 
Karswood poultry spice Sweets were bad for you and eating between meals 
was bad for you, though curiously enought there were certain kmds of eating 
between meals that Mother always allowed When she was making plum jam 
she used to let us eat the syrupy stuff that was skimmed off the top, and we used 
to gorge ourselves with it till we were sick Although nearly everymg in the 
world was either dangerous or poisonous, there were certain things that had 
mysterious virtues Raw omons were a cure for almost everything A stocking 
tied round your neck was a cure for a sore throat Sulphur m a dog’s drinking 
water acted as a tome, and old Nailer’s bowl behind the back door always had a 
lump of sulphur in it which stayed there year after year, never dissolving 
We used to have tea at six By four Mother had generally finished the 
housework, and between four and six she used to have a quiet cup of tea and 
‘read her paper’, as she called it As a matter of fact she didn’t often read the 
newspaper except on Sundays. The week-day papers only had the day’s news, 
and it was only occasionally that there was a murder. But the editors of the 
Sunday papers had grasped that people don’t really mind whether their 
murders are up to date and when there was no new murder on hand they’d 
hash up an old one, sometimes going as far back as Dr Palmer and Mrs 
Manning. X think Mother thought of the world outside Lower Binfield chiefly 
as a place where murders were committed. Murders had a terrible fascination 
for her* because, as she often said, she just didn’t know how people could be so 
wicked Cutting their wives’ throats, burying their fathers under cement 
floors, throwing babies down wells! How anyone could do such things 1 The 
Jack the Ripper scare had happened about the time when Father and Mother 



460 Coming up for Avr 

were married, and the big wooden shutters we used to draw over the shop 
windows every mght dated from then Shutters for shop windows were going 
out, most of the shops m the High Street didn’t have them, but Mother felt 
safe behmd them All along, she said, she’d had a dreadful feeling that Jack the 
Ripper was hiding m Lower Bmfield The Cnppen case-but that was years 
later, when I was almost grown up-upset her badly I can hear her voice now 
‘Cutting his poor wife up and burymg her in the coal cellar 1 The idea) What I’d 
do to that man if I got hold of him 1 ’ And curiously enough, when she thought 
of the dreadful wickedness of that little American doctor who dismembered his 
wife (and made a very neat job of it by taking all the bones out and chucking the 
head into the sea, if I remember rightly) the tears actually came into her eyes 
But what she mostly read on week-days was Hilda’s Home Companion In 
those days it was part of the regular furnishing of any home like ours, and as a 
matter of fact it still exists, though it’s been a bit crowded out by the more 
streamlined women’s papers that have come up smce the war I had a look at a 
copy only the other day It’s changed, but less than most things There are still 
the same enormous serial stories that go on for six months (and it all comes 
right m the end with orange blossoms to follow), and the same Household 
Hints, and the same ads for sewing-machines and remedies for bad legs It’s 
chiefly the prmt and the illustrations that have changed In those days the 
heroine had to look like an egg-timer and now she has to look like a cylinder 
Mother was a slow reader and believed in getting her threepennyworth out of 
Hilda’s Home Companion Sitting m the old yellow armchair beside the hearth, 
with her feet on the iron fender and the little pot of strong tea stewing on the 
hob, she’d work her way steadily from cover to cover, right through the serial, 
the two short stories, the Household Hints, the ads for Zam-Buk, and the 
answers to correspondents. Hilda’s Home Companion generally lasted her the 
week out, and some weeks she didn’t even finish it Sometimes the heat of the 
fire, or the buzzing of the bluebottles on summer afternoons, would send her 
off into a doze, and at about a quarter to six she’d wake up with a tremendous 
start, glance at the clock on the mantelpiece, and then get into a stew because 
tea was going to be late. But tea was never late 
In those days-till 1909, to be exact-Father could still afford an errand boy, 
and he used to leave the shop to him and come m to tea with the backs of his 
hands all mealy Then Mother would stop cutting slices of bread for a moment 
and say, ‘If you’ll give us grace, Father’, and Father, while we all bent our 
heads on our chests, would mumble reverently, ‘Fwat we bout to 
receive-Lord make us truly thankful- Amen.’ Later on, when Joe was a bit 
older, it would be ‘ You give us grace today, Joe’, and Joe would pipe it out 
Mother never said grace, it had to be someone of the male sex 
There were always bluebottles buzzing on summer afternoons Ours wasn’t 
a sanitary house, precious few houses in Lower Bmfield were. I suppose the 
town must have contained five hundred houses and there certainly can’t have 
bee® morethan ten with bathrooms or fifty with what we should now describe 
asa w.q, Insummer our backyard always smelt of dustbins And all houses had 
insects in them. We had blackbeetles in the wainscoting and crickets 



Corning up for Air 46 1 

somewhere behind the kitchen range, besides, of course, the meal-worms in 
the shop. In those days even a house-proud woman like Mother didn’t see 
anything to object to m blackbeetles They were as much a part of the kitchen 
as the dresser or the rollmg-pin But there were msects and insects The houses 
in the bad street behmd the brewery, where Katie Simmons lived, were 
overrun by bugs Mother or any of the shopkeepers’ wives would have died of 
shame if they’d had bugs in the house In fact it was considered proper to say 
that you didn’t even know a bug by sight 
The great blue flies used to come sailing into the larder and sit longingly on 
the wire covers over the meat ‘Drat the flies!’ people used to say, but the flies 
were an act of God and apart from meat-covers and fly-papers you couldn’t do 
much about them I said a little while back that the first t hing I remember is 
the smell of sainfoin, but the smell of dustbins is also a pretty early memory 
When I think of Mother’s kitchen, with the stone floor and the beetle-traps 
and the steel fender and the blackleaded range, I always seem to hear the 
bluebottles buzzing and smell the dustbin, and also old Nailer, who carried a 
pretty powerful smell of dog And God knows there are worse smells and 
sounds Which would you sooner listen to, a bluebottle or a bombing plane? 


3 


Joe started going to Walton Grammar School two years before I did Neither 
of us went there till we were mne It meant a four-mile bike ride morning and 
evenmg, and Mother was scared of allowing us among the traffic, which by that 
time included a very few motor-cars 

For several years we went to the dame-school kept by old Mrs Howlett 
Most of the shopkeepers’ children went there, to save them from the shame 
and come-down of going to the board school, though everyone knew that 
Mother Howlett was an old imposter and worse than useless as a teacher She 
was over seventy, she was very deaf, she could hardly see through her 
spectacles, and all she owned m the way of equipment was a cane, a 
blackboard, a few dog-eared grammar books, and a couple of dozen smelly 
slates She could just manage the girls, but the boys simply laughed at her and 
played truant as often as they felt like it. Once there was a frightful scandal 
because a boy put his hand up a girl’s dress, a thing I didn’t understand at the 
time Mother Howlett succeeded m hushing it up When you did something 
particularly bad her formula was ‘I’ll tell your father’, and on very rare 
occasions she did so But we were quite sharp enough to see that she daren’t do 
it too often, and even when she let out at you with the cane she was so old and 
clumsy that it was easy to dodge. - 

Joe was only eight when he got in with a tough gang of boys who called 



462 Coming up for Air 

themselves the Black Hand The leader was Sid Lovegrove, the saddler’s 
younger son, who was about thirteen, and there were two other shopkeepers’ 
sons, an errand boy from the brewery, and two farm lads who sometimes 
managed to cut work and go off with the gang for a couple of hours The farm 
lads were great lumps bursting out of corduroy breeches, with very broad 
accents and rather looked down on by the rest of the gang, but they were 
tolerated because they knew twice as much about animals as any of the others 
One of them, nicknamed Ginger, would even catch a rabbit in his hands 
occasionally If he saw one lying m the grass he used to fling himself on it like a 
spread-eagle There was a big social distinction between the shopkeepers’ sons 
and the sons of labourers and farm-hands, but the local boys didn’t usually pay 
much attention to it till they were about sixteen The gang had a secret 
password and an ‘ordeal’ which included cutting your finger and eating an 
earthworm, and they gave themselves out to be frightful desperadoes 
Certainly they managed to make a nuisance of themselves, broke windows, 
chased cows, tore the knockers off doors, and stole fruit by the hundredweight 
Sometimes m winter they managed to borrow a couple of ferrets and go 
ratting, when the farmers would let them They all had catapults and squailers, 
and they were always saving up to buy a saloon pistol, which m those days cost 
five shillings, but the savings never amounted to more than about threepence 
In summer they used to go fishing and bird-nestmg When Joe was at Mrs 
Howlett’s he used to cut school at least once a week, and even at the Grammar 
School he managed it about once a fortnight There was a boy at the Grammar 
School, an auctioneer’s son, who could copy any handwriting and for a penny 
he’d forge a letter from your mother saying you’d been ill yesterday Of course 
I was wild to join the Black Hand, but Joe always choked me off and said they 
didn’t want any blasted kids hanging round 
It was the thought of going fishing that really appealed to me At eight years 
old I hadn’t yet been fishing, except with a penny net, with which you can 
sometimes catch a stickleback Mother was always terrified of letting us go 
anywhere near water She ‘forbade’ fishing, m the way m which parents in 
those days “forbade’ almost everything, and I hadn’t yet grasped that grown- 
ups can’t see round corners. But the thought of fishing sent me wild with 
excitement Many a time I’d been past the pool at the Mill Farm and watched 
the small carp basking on the surface, and sometimes under the willow tree at 
the comer a great diamond-shaped carp that to my eyes looked enormous-six 
inches long, I suppose-would suddenly rise to the surface, gulp down a grub, 
and sink again I’d spent hours gluing my nose against the window of Wallace’s 
in the High Street, where fishing tackle and guns and bicycles were sold I used 
to he-awake on summer mornings thinking of the tales Joe had told me about 
fishing, how you mixed bread paste, how your float gives a bob and plunges 
under and you feel the rod bending and the fish tugging at the line Is it any use 
talking about it, I wonder— the sort of fairy light that fish and fishing tackle 
have ih a kid’s eyes? Some kids feel the same about guns and shooting, some 
feel it about motor-bikes or aeroplanes or horses. It’s not a thin g that you can 
©gplSSnor rationalize, rt’s merely magic. One moming-it was m June and I 



Coming up for Air 463 

must have been eight-I knew that Joe was going to cut school and go out 
fishing, and I made up my mmd to follow In some way Joe guessed what I was 
thinking about, and he started on me while we were dressing 

‘Now then, young George' Don’t you get thinking you’re coming with the 
gang today You stay back home ’ 

‘No, I didn’t I didn’t think nothing about it 5 

‘Yes, you did' You thought you were coming with the gang ’ 

‘No, I didn’t'’ 

‘Yes, you did'’ 

‘No, I didn’t'’ 

‘Yes, you did' You stay back home We don’t want any bloody kids along ’ 
Joe had just learned the word ‘bloody’ and was always usmg it Father 
overheard him once and swore that he’d thrash the life out of Joe, but as usual 
he didn’t do so After breakfast Joe started off on his bike, with his satchel and 
his Grammar School cap, five minutes early as he always did when he meant to 
cut school, and when it was time for me to leave for Mother Howlett’s I 
sneaked off and hid in the lane behind the allotments I knew the gang were 
going to the pond at the Mill Farm, and I was going to follow them if they 
murdered me for it Probably they’d give me a hiding, and probably I wouldn’t 
get home to dinner, and then Mother would know that I’d cut school and I’d 
get another hiding, but I didn’t care I was just desperate to go fishing with the 
gang I was cunning, too I allowed Joe plenty of time to make a circuit round 
and get to the Mill Farm by road, and then I followed down the lane and 
skirted round the meadows on the far side of the hedge, so as to get almost to 
the pond before the gang saw me It was a wonderful June mormng The 
buttercups were up to my knees There was a breath of wind just stirring the 
tops of the elms, and the great green clouds of leaves were sort of soft and rich 
like silk And it was nine m the mormng and I was eight years old, and all 
round me it was early summer, with great tangled hedges where the wild roses 
were still in bloom, and bits of soft white cloud drifting overhead, and in the 
distance the low hills and the dim blue masses of the woods round Upper 
Bmfield. And I didn’t give a damn for any of it All I was thinking of was the 
green pool and the carp and the gang with their hooks and lines and bread 
paste It was as though they were m paradise and I’d got to join them 
Presently I managed to sneak up on them-four of them, Joe and Sid 
Lovegrove and the errand boy and another shopkeeper’s son, Harry Barnes I 
think his name was 

Joe turned and saw me ‘Christ’’ he said ‘It’s the kid ’ He walked up to me 
like a tom-cat that’s going to start a fight ‘Now then, you! What’d I tell you^ 
You get back ’ome double quick ’ 

Both Joe and I were inclined to drop our aitches if we were at all excited I 
backed away from him. 

‘I’m not gomg back ’ome ’ 

‘Yes you are ’ 

‘Clip his ear, Joe,’ said Sid ‘We don’t want no kids along.’ 

* Are you going back ’ome?’ said Joe. 



Coming up for Atr 


464 

‘No’ 

‘Righto, my boy* Right-Ao 1 ’ 

Then he started on me The next minute he was chasing me round, catching 
me one clip after another But I didn’t run away from the pool, I ran m circles 
Presently he’d caught me and got me down, and then he knelt on my upper 
arms and began screwing my ears, which was his favourite torture and one I 
couldn’t stand I was blubbing by this time, but still I wouldn’t give m and 
promise to go home I wanted to stay and go fishing with the gang And 
suddenly the others swung round in my favour and told Joe to get up off my 
chest and let me stay if I wanted to So I stayed after all 

The others had some hooks and lines and floats and a lump of bread paste m 
a rag, and we all cut ourselves willow switches from the tree at the corner of the 
pool The farmhouse was only about two hundred yards away, and you had to 
keep out of sight because old Brewer was very down on fishing Not that it 
made any difference to him, he only used the pool for watering his cattle, but 
he hated boys The others were still jealous of me and kept telling me to get out 
of the light and r emindin g me that I was only a kid and knew nothing about 
fishing They said that I was making such a noise I’d scare all the fish away, 
though actually I was making about half as much noise as anyone else there 
Finally they wouldn’t let me sit beside them and sent me to another part of the 
pool where the water was shallower and there wasn’t so much shade They said 
a kid like me was sure to keep splashing the water and frighten the fish away It 
was a rotten part of the pool, a part where no fish would ordinarily come I 
knew that I seemed to know by a kind of instinct the places where a fish would 
he Still, I was fishing at last I was sitting on the grass bank with the rod m my 
hands, with the flies buzzing round, and the smell of wild peppermint fit to 
knock you down, watching the red float on the green water, and I was happy as 
a tinker although the tear-marks mixed up with dirt were still all over my face 

Lord knows how long we sat there The morning stretched out and out, and 
the sun got higher and higher, and nobody had a bite It was a hot still day, too 
clear for fishing The floats lay on the water with never a quiver. You could see 
deep down into the water as though you were looking into a kind of dark green 
glass Out in the middle of the pool you could see the fish lying just under the 
surface, sunning themselves, and sometimes in the weeds near the side a newt 
would come gliding upwards and rest there with his fingers on the weeds and 
his nose just out of the water But the fish weren’t biting The others kept 
shouting that they’d got a mbble, but it was always a he And the time 
stretched out and out and it got hotter and hotter, and the flies ate you alive, 
and the wild peppermint under the bank smelt like Mother Wheeler’s sweet- 
shop I was getting hungrier and hungrier, all the more because I didn’t know 
for certain where my dinner was coming from But I sat as still as a mouse and 
never took my eyes off the float The others had given me a lump of bait about 
the size of a marble, telhng me that would have to do for me, but for along time 
I didn’t even dare to re-bait my hook, because every time I pulled my lineup 
they swore I was making enough noise to frighten every fish within five miles 

| suppose we must have been there about two hours when suddenly my float 



Coming up for Air 465 

gave a quiver I knew it was a fish It must have been a fish that was just passing 
accidentally and saw my bait There’s no mistaking the movement your float 
gives when it’s a real bite It’s quite different from the way it moves when 
you twitch your line accidentally The next moment it gave a sharp bob and 
almost went under I couldn’t hold myself in any longer I yelled to the 
others 

‘I’ve got a bite f ’ 

‘Rats f ’ yelled Sid Lovegrove instantly 

But the next moment there wasn’t any doubt about it The float dived 
straight down, I could still see it under the water, kind of dim red, and I felt the 
rod tighten m my hand Christ, that feeling 1 The line jerking and straining and 
a fish on the other end of it 1 The others saw my rod bending, and the next 
moment they’d all flung their rods down and rushed round to me I gave a 
terrific haul and the fish-a great huge silvery fish-came flying up through the 
air The same moment all of us gave a yell of agony The fish had slipped off the 
hook and fallen into the wild peppermint under the bank But he’d fallen into 
shallow water where he couldn’t turn over, and for perhaps a second he lay 
there on his side helpless Joe flung himself into the water, splashing us all 
over, and grabbed him in both hands ‘I got ’im 1 ’ he yelled The next moment 
he’d flung the fish on to the grass and we were all kneeling round it. How we 
gloated 1 The poor dying brute flapped up and down and his scales glistened all 
the colours of the rainbow. It was a huge carp, seven inches long at least, and 
must have weighed a quarter of a pound How we shouted to see him' But the 
next moment it was as though a shadow had fallen across us We looked up, 
and there was old Brewer standing over us, with his tall billycock hat-one of 
those hats they used to wear that were a cross between a top hat and a 
bowler-and his cowhide gaiters and a thick hazel stick in his hand 
We suddenly cowered like partridges when there’s a hawk overhead He 
looked from one to other of us He had a wicked old mouth with no teeth in it, 
and since he’d shaved his beard off his chin looked like a nutcracker 
‘What are you boys doing here?’ he said 

There wasn’t much doubt about what we were doing Nobody answered 
‘I’ll learn ’ee come fishing in my pool 1 ’ he suddenly roared, and the next 
moment he was on us, whacking out in all directions 
The Black Hand broke and fled We left all the rods behind and also the fish 
Old Brewer chased us half across the meadow His legs were stiff and he 
couldn’t move fast, but he got m some good swipes before we were out of his 
reach We left him m the middle of the field, yelling after us that he knew all 
our names and was going to tell our fathers I’d been at the back and most of 
the wallops had landed on me I had some nasty red weals on the calves of my 
legs when we got to the other side of the hedge 

I spent the rest of the day with the gang They hadn’t made up their mind 
whether I was really a member yet, but for the time being they tolerated me 
The errand boy*, who’ d had themoTning off on some lying pretext or othenrhad 
to go back to the brewery. The rest of us went for a long, meandering, 
scrounging kind of walk, the sorrof walk that boys go for when they’re away 



466 Corning up for Air 

from home all day, and especially when they’re away without permission It 
was the first real boy’s walk I’d had, quite different from the walks we used to 
go with Katie Simmons We had our dinner in a dry ditch on the edge of the 
town, full of rusty cans and wild fennel The others gave me bits of their 
dinner, and Sid Lovegrove had a penny, so someone fetched a Penny Monster 
which we had between us It was very hot, and the fennel smelt very strong, 
and the gas of the Penny Monster made us belch Afterwards we wandered up 
the dusty white road to Upper Binfield, the first time I’d been that way, I 
believe, and into the beech woods with the carpets of dead leaves and the great 
smooth trunks that soar up into the sky so that the birds in the upper branches 
look like dots You could go wherever you liked in the woods in those days 
Binfield House, was shut up, they didn’t preserve the pheasants any longer, 
and at the worst you’d only meet a carter with a load of wood There was a tree 
that had been sawn down, and the rings of the trunk looked like a target, and 
we had shots at it with stones Then the others had shots at birds with their 
catapults, and Sid Lovegrove swore he’d hit a chaffinch and it had stuck in a 
fork in the tree Joe said he was lying, and they argued and almost fought 
Then we went down into a chalk hollow full of beds of dead leaves and shouted 
to hear the echo Someone shouted a dirty word, and then we said over all the 
dirty words we knew, and the others jeered at me because I only knew three 
Sid Lovegrove said he knew how babies were born and it was just the same as 
rabbits except that the baby came out of the woman’s navel Harry Barnes 
started to carve the word-on a beech tree, but got fed up with it after the first 
two letters Then we went round by the lodge of Binfield House There was a 
rumour that somewhere in the grounds there was a pond with enormous fish m 
it, but no one ever dared go inside because old Hodges, the lodge-keeper who 
acted as a kind of caretaker, was ‘down’ on boys He was digging m his 
vegetable garden by the lodge when we passed We cheeked him over the fence 
until he chased us off, and then we went down to the Walton Road and cheeked 
the carters, keeping on the other side of the hedge so that they couldn’t reach 
us with their whips Beside the Walton Road there was a place that had been a 
quarry and then a rubbish dump, and finally had got overgrown with 
blackberry bushes There were great mounds of rusty old tin cans and bicycle 
frames and saucepans with holes m them and broken bottles with weeds 
growing all over them, and we spent nearly an hour and got ourselves filthy 
from head to foot routing out iron fence posts, because Harry Barnes swore 
that the blacksmith in Lower Binfield would pay sixpence a hundredweight for 
old iron. Then Joe found a late thrush’s nest with half-fledged chicks in it m a 
blackberry bush After a lot of argument about what to do with them we took 
the chicks out, had shots at them with stones, and finally stamped on them 
There were four of them, and we each had one to stamp on. It was getting on 
towards tea-time now We knew that old Brewer would be as good as his word 
and there was a hiding ahead of us, but we were getting too hungry to stay out 
much longer. Finally we trailed home, with one more row on the way, because 
when We" Were passing the allotments we saw a rat and chased it with sticks, and 
old llesmetthe station-master, who worked at his allotment every night and 



Coming up for Air 467 

was very proud of it, came after us m a tearing rage because we’d trampled on 
his omon-bed 

I’d walked ten miles and I wasn’t tired All day I’d trailed after the gang and 
tried to do everything they did, and they’d called me ‘the kid’ and snubbed me 
as much as they could, but I’d more or less kept my end up I had a wonderful 
feeling inside me, a feeling you can’t know about unless you’ve had lt-but if 
you’re a man you’ll have had it some time I knew that I wasn’t a kid any 
longer, I was a boy at last And it’s a wonderful thing to be a boy, to go roaming 
where grown-ups can’t catch you, and to chase rats and kill birds and shy 
stones and cheek carters and shout dirty words It’s a kind of strong, rank 
feeling, a feeling of knowing everything and fearing nothing, and it’s all bound 
up with breaking rules and killing things The white dusty roads, the hot 
sweaty feeling of one’s clothes, the smell of fennel and wild peppermint, the 
dirty words, the sour stink of the rubbish dump, the taste of fizzy lemonade 
and the gas that made one belch, the stamping on the young birds the feel of 
the fish straining on the line-it was all part of it Thank God I’m a man, 
because no woman ever has that feeling 

Sure enough, old Brewer had sent round and told everybody Father looked 
very glum, fetched a strap out of the shop, and said he was going to ‘thrash the 
life out of’ Joe But Joe struggled and yelled and kicked, and in the end Father 
didn’t get in more than a couple of whacks at him However, he got a caning 
from the headmaster of the Grammar School next day I tried to struggle too, 
but I was small enough for Mother to get me across her knee, and she gave me 
what-for with the strap So I’d had three hidings that day, one from Joe, one 
from old Brewer, and one from Mother Next day the gang decided that I 
wasn’t really a member yet and that I’d got to go through the ‘ordeal’ (a word 
they’d got out of the Red Indian stories) after all They were very strict m 
insisting that you had to bite the worm before you swallowed it Moreover, 
because I was the youngest and they were jealous of me for being the only one 
to catch anything, they all made out afterwards that the fish I’d caught wasn’t 
really a big one In a general way the tendency of fish, when people talk about 
them, is to get bigger and bigger, but this one got smaller and smaller, until to 
hear the others talk you’d have thought it was no bigger than a minnow 

But it didn’t matter I’d been fishing I’d seen the float dive under the water 
and felt the fish tugging at the lme, and however many lies they told they 
couldn’t take that away from me 



4 


For the next seven years, from when I was eight to when I was fifteen, what I 
chiefly remember is fishing 

Don’t think that I did nothing else It’s only that when you look back over a 
long period of time, certain things seem to swell up till they overshadow 
everything else I left Mother Howlett’s and went to the Grammar School, 
with a leather satchel and a black cap with yellow stripes, and got my first 
bicycle and a long time afterwards my first long trousers My first bike was a 
fixed-wheel-free-wheel bikes were very expensive then When you went 
downhill you put your feet up on the front rests and let the pedals go whizzing 
round That was one of the characteristic sights of the early mneteen- 
hundreds-a boy sailing downhill with his head back and his feet up in the air I 
went to the Grammar School in fear and trembling, because of the frightful 
tales Joe had told me about old Whiskers (his name was Wicksey) the 
headmaster, who was certainly a dreadful-lookmg little man, with a face just 
like a wolf, and at the end of the big schoolroom he had a glass case with canes 
in it, which he’d sometimes take out and swish through the air m a ternfymg 
manner But to my surprise I did rather well at school It had never occurred to 
me that I might be cleverer than Joe, who was two years older than me and had 
bullied me ever since he could walk Actually Joe was an utter dunce, got the 
cane about once a week, and stayed somewhere near the bottom of the school 
till he was sixteen My second term I took a prize m arithmetic and another in 
some queer stuff that was mostly concerned with pressed flowers and went by 
the name of Science, and by the time I was fourteen Whiskers was talking 
about scholarships and Reading Umversity Father, who had ambitions for Joe 
and me m those days, was very anxious that I should go to ‘college’. There was 
an idea floating round that I was to be a schoolteacher and Joe was to be an 
auctioneer 

But I haven’t many memories connected with school When I’ve mixed with 
chaps from the upper classes, as I did during the war, I’ve been struck by the 
fact that they never really get over that frightful drilling they go through at 
public schools Either it flattens them out into half-wits or they spend the rest 
of their lives kicking against it. It wasn’t so with boys of our class, the sons of 
shopkeepers and farmers You went to the Grammar School and you stayed 
there Ell you were sixteen, just to show that you weren’t a prole, but school was 
chiefly a place that you wanted to get away from You’d no sentiment of 
loyalty, no* goofy feeling about the old grey stones (and they were old, right 



Coming up for Air 469 

enough, the school had been founded by Cardinal Wolsey), and there was no 
Old Boy’s tie and not even a school song You had your half-holidays to 
yourself, because games weren’t compulsory and as often as not you cut them 
We played football in braces, and though it was considered proper to play 
cricket m a belt, you wore your ordinary shirt and trousers The only game I 
really cared about was the stump cricket we used to play in the gravel yard 
during the break, with a bat made out of a bit of packing case and a compo ball 
But I remember the smell of the big schoolroom, a smell of ink and dust and 
boots, and the stone in the yard that had been a mounting block and was used 
for sharpening knives on, and the little baker’s shop opposite where they sold a 
kind of Chelsea bun, twice the size of the Chelsea buns you get nowadays, 
which were called Lardy Busters and cost a halfpenny I did all the things you 
do at school I carved my name on a desk and got the cane for lt-you were 
always caned for it if you were caught, but it was the etiquette that you had to 
carve your name And I got mky fingers and bit my nails and made darts out of 
penholders and played conkers and passed round dirty stories and learned to 
masturbate and cheeked old Blowers, the English master, and bullied the life 
out of little Willy Simeon, the undertaker’s son, who was half-witted and 
believed everything you told him Our favourite trick was to send him to shops 
to buy things that didn’t exist All the old gags -the ha’porth of penny stamps, 
the rubber hammer, the left-handed screwdriver, the pot of striped 
pamt-poor Willy fell for all of them We had grand sport one afternoon, 
putting him in a tub and telling him to lift himself up by the handles He ended 
up in an asylum, poor Willy But it was m the holidays that one really lived 
There were good things to do m those days In winter we used to borrow a 
couple of ferrets-Mother would never let Joe and me keep them at home, 
‘nasty smelly things’ she called them-and go round the farms and ask leave to 
do a bit of ratting Sometimes they let us, sometimes they told us to hook it and 
said we were more trouble than the rats Later m winter we’d follow the 
threshing machine and help kill the rats when they threshed the stacks One 
winter, 1908 it must have been, the Thames flooded and then froze and there 
was skating for weeks on end, and Harry Barnes broke his collar-bone on the 
ice In early spring we went after squirrels with squailers, and later on we went 
birdnesting We had a theory that birds can’t count and it’s all right if you 
leave one egg, but we were cruel httle beasts and sometimes we’d just knock 
the nest down and trample on the eggs or chicks There was another game we 
had when the toads were spawning We used to catch toads, ram the nozzle of a 
bicycle pump up their backsides, and blow them up till they burst That’s what 
boys are like, I don’t know why In summer we used to bike over the Burford 
Weir and bathe Wally Lovegrove, Sid’s young cousin, was drowned in 1906. 
He got tangled m the weeds at the bottom, and when the drag-hooks brought 
his body to the surface his face was jet black 
But fishing was the real thing. We went many a tune to old Brewer’s pool, 
and took tiny carp and tench out of it, and once a whopping eel, and therewete 
other cow-ponds that had fish in them and were within walking distance cm 
Saturday afternoons. But after we got bicycles we started fishing in the 



4jo Coming up for Air 

Thames below Burford Weir It seemed more grown-up than fishing m cow- 
ponds There were no farmers chasing you away, and there are thumping fish 
m the Thames-though, so far as I know, nobody’s ever been known to catch 
one 

It’s queer, the feeling I had for fishmg-and still have, really I can’t call 
myself a fisherman I’ve never m my life caught a fish two feet long, and it’s 
thirty years now since I’ve had a rod in my hands And yet when I look back 
the whole of my boyhood from eight to fifteen seems to have revolved round 
the days when we went fishing Every detail has stuck clear m my memory I 
can remember individual days and individual fish, there isn’t a cow-pond or a 
backwater that I can’t see a picture of if I shut my eyes and think I could write 
a book on the techmque of fishing When we were kids we didn’t have much m 
the way of tackle, it cost too much and most of our threepence a week (which 
was the usual pocket-money in those days) went on sweets and Lardy Busters 
Very small kids generally fish with a bent pm, which is too blunt to be much 
use, but you can make a pretty good hook (though of course it’s got no barb) by 
bending a needle in a candle flame with a pair of pliers The farm lads knew 
how to plait horsehair so that it was almost as good as gut, and you can take a 
small fish on a single horsehair Later we got to havmg two-shilling fishing- 
rods and even reels of sorts God, what hours I’ve spent gazing into Wallace’s 
window 1 Even the 410 guns and saloon pistols didn’t thrill me so much as the 
fishing tackle And the copy of Gamage’s catalogue that I picked up 
somewhere, on a rubbish dump I think, and studied as though it had been the 
Bible 1 Even now I could give you all the details about gut-substitute and gimp 
and Limerick hooks and priests and disgorgers and Nottingham reels and God 
knows how many other technicalities 

Then there were the kinds of bait we used to use In our shop there were 
always plenty of mealworms, which were good but not very good Gentles 
were better. You had to beg them off old Gravitt, the butcher, and the gang 
used to draw lots or do enamena-mma-mo to decide who should go and ask, 
because Gravitt wasn’t usually too pleasant about it He was a big, rough-faced 
old devil with a voice like a mastiff, and when he barked, as he generally did 
when speaking to boys, all the knives and steels on his blue apron would give a 
jingle You’d go in with an empty treacle-tin m your hand, hang round till any 
customers had disappeared and then say very humbly 

‘Please, Mr Gravitt, y’got any gentles todays ’ 

Generally he’d roar out: ‘What 1 Gentles! Gentles m my shop* Ain't seen 
such a thing in years Think I got blow-flies m my shop^’ 

He had, of course They were everywhere. He used to deal with them with a 
strip of leather on the end of a stick, with which he could reach out to 
enormous distances and smack a fly into paste. Sometimes you had to go away 
without any gentles, but as a rule he’d shout after you just as you were going 

°Ere! Go round the backyard an’ ’ave a look P’raps you might find one or 
two If you looked careful.’ 

You used to find them in little clusters everywhere Gravitt’s backyard smelt 
feys battlefield. Butchers didn’t have refrigerators in those days Gentles live 



Coming up for Air 471 

longer if you keep them in sawdust 

Wasp grubs are good, though it’s hard to make them stick on the hook, 
unless you bake them first When someone found a wasps’ nest we’d go out at 
night and pour turnpentine down it and plug up the hole with mud Next day 
the wasps would all be dead and you could dig out the nest and take the grubs 
Once something went wrong, the turps missed the hole or something, and 
when we took the plug out the wasps, which had been shut up all night, came 
out all together with a zoom We weren’t very badly stung, but it was a pity 
there was no one standing by with a stopwatch Grasshoppers are about the 
best bait there is, especially for chub You stick them on the hook without any 
shot and just flick them to and fro on the surface-‘dappmg’, they call it But 
you can never get more than two or three grasshoppers at a time Greenbottle 
flies, which are also damned difficult to catch, are the best bait for dace, 
especially on clear days You want to put them on the hook alive, so that they 
wriggle A chub will even take a wasp, but it’s a ticklish job to put a live wasp 
on the hook 

God knows how many other baits there were Bread paste you make by 
squeezing water through white bread m a rag Then there are cheese paste and 
honey paste and paste with aniseed m it Boiled wheat isn’t bad for roach 
Redworms are good for gudgeon You find them m very old manure heaps 
And you also find another kind of worm called a brandling, which is striped 
and smells like an earwig, and which is very good bait for perch Ordmary 
earthworms are good for perch You have to put them in moss to keep them 
fresh and lively If you try to keep them m earth they die Those brown flies 
you find on cowdung are pretty good for roach You can take a chub on a 
cherry, so they say, and I’ve seen a roach taken with a currant out of a bun 

In those days, from the sixteenth of June (when the coarse-fishmg season 
starts) till midwinter I wasn’t often without a tin of worms or gentles in my 
pocket I had some fights with Mother about it, but m the end she gave m, 
fishing came off the list of forbidden things and Father even gave me a two- 
shilling fishing-rod for Christmas in 1903 Joe was barely fifteen when he 
started going after girls, and from then on he seldom came out fishing, which 
he said was a kid’s game But there were about half a dozen others who were as 
mad on fishing as I was Christ, those fishing days 1 The hot sticky afternoons 
in the schoolroom when I’ve sprawled across my desk, with old Blowers’s 
voice grating away about predicates and subjunctives and relative clauses, and 
all that’s in my mind is the backwater near Burford Weir and the green pool 
under the willows with the dace gliding to and fro* And then the terrific rush 
on bicycles after tea, to Chamford Hill and down to the river to get in an hour’s 
fishing before dark The still summer evening, the faint splash of the weir, the 
rings on the water where the fish are rising, the midges eating you alive, the 
shoals of dace swarming round your hook and never biting. And the kind of 
passion with which you’d watch the black backs of the fish swarming round, 
hoping and praying (yes, literally praying) that one of them would change his 
mind and grab your bait before it got too dark And then it was always ‘Let’s 
have five minutes more’, and then ‘Just five minutes more’, until in the end you 



4j2 Coming up for Avr 

had to walk your bike into the town because Towler, the copper, was prowling 
round and you could be ‘had up’ for riding without a light And the times in 
the summer holidays when we went out to make a day of it with boiled eggs and 
bread and butter and a bottle of lemonade, and fished and bathed and then 
fished again and did occasionally catch something At night you’d come home 
with filthy hands so hungry that you’d eaten what was left of your bread paste, 
with three or four smelly dace wrapped up m your handerchief Mother always 
refused to cook the fish I brought home She would never allow that river fish 
were edible, except trout and salmon ‘Nasty muddy things’, she called them 
The fish I remember best of all are the ones I didn’t catch Especially the 
monstrous fish you always used to see when you went for a walk along the 
towpath on Sunday afternoons and hadn’t a rod with you There was no 
fishing on Sundays, even the Thames Conservancy Board didn’t allow it On 
Sundays you had to go for what was called a ‘nice walk’ in your thick black suit 
and the Eton collar that sawed your head off It was on a Sunday that I saw a 
pike a yard long asleep m shallow water by the bank and nearly got him with a 
stone And sometimes in the green pools on the edge of the reeds you’d see a 
huge Thames trout go sailing past The trout grow to vast sizes in the Thames, 
but they’re practically never caught They say that one of the real Thames 
fishermen, the old bottle-nosed blokes that you see muffled up in overcoats on 
camp-stools with twenty-foot roach-poles at all seasons of the year, will 
willingly give up a year of his life to catching a Thames trout I don’t blame 
them, I see their point entirely, and still better I saw it then 
Of course other things were happemng I grew three inches in a year, got my 
long trousers, won some prizes at school, went to Confirmation classes, told 
dirty stories, took to reading, and had crazes for white mice, fretwork, and 
postage stamps But it’s always fishing that I remember Summer days, and the 
flat water-meadows and the blue hills m the distance, and the willows up the 
backwater and the pools underneath like a kind of deep green glass Summer 
evenings, the fish breaking the water, the nightjars hawking round your head, 
the smell of mghtstocks and latakia Don’t mistake what I’m talking about It’s 
not that I’m trying to put across any of that poetry of childhood stuff. I know 
that’s all baloney Old Porteous (a friend of mine, a retired schoolmaster. I’ll 
tell you about him later) is great on the poetry of childhood. Sometimes he 
reads me stuff about it out of books Wordsworth, Lucy Qray; There was a 
time when meadow, grove, and all that Needless to say he’s got no kids of his 
own The truth is that kids aren’t in anyway poetic, they’re merely savage little 
animals, except that no animal is a quarter as selfish A boy isn’t interested m 
meadows, groves, and so forth He never looks at a landscape, doesn’t give a 
damn for flowers, and unless they affect him m some way, such as being good 
to eat, he doesn’t know one plant from another Killing thmgs-that’s about as 
near to poetry as a boy gets And yet all the while there’s that peculiar 
intensity, the power itf longing for things as you can’t long when you’re grown 
up, andfffie#thng;#at time stretches out and out m front of you and that 
wbafceyenyoo*re doing you could go on for ever 
I an ugly little boy, with butter-coloured hair which was always 



Coming up for Avr 473 

cropped short except for a quiff m front I don’t idealize my childhood, and 
unlike many people I’ve no wish to be young again Most of the things I used 
to care for would leave me something more than cold I don’t care if I never see 
a cricket ball again, and I wouldn’t give you threepence for a hundredweight of 
sweets But I’ve still got. I’ve always had, that peculiar feeling for fishing 
You’ll think it damned silly, no doubt, but I’ve actually half a wish to go 
fishing even now, when I’m fat and forty-five and got two kids and a house in 
the suburbs Why’ Because m a manner of speaking I am sentimental about my 
childhood-not my own particular childhood, but the civilization which I grew 
up m and which is now, I suppose, just about at its last kick And fishing is 
somehow typical of that civilization As soon as you think of fishing you think 
of things that don’t belong to the modern world The very idea of sitting all day 
under a willow tree beside a quiet pool-and being able to find a quiet pool to sit 
beside-belongs to the time before the war, before the radio, before aeroplanes, 
before Hitler There’s a kind of peacefulness even m the names of English 
coarse fish Roach, rudd, dace, bleak, barbel, bream, gudgeon, pike, chub, 
carp, tench They’re solid kind of names The people who made them up 
hadn’t heard of machine-guns, they didn’t live in terror of the sack or spend 
their time eatmg aspirms, going to the pictures, and wondering how to keep 
out of the concentration camp 

Does anyone go fishing nowadays, I wonder’ Anywhere within a hundred 
miles of London there are no fish left to catch A few dismal fishing-clubs plant 
themselves in rows along the banks of canals, and millionaires go trout-fishmg 
in private waters round Scotch hotels, a sort of snobbish game of catching 
hand-reared fish with artificial flies. But who fishes m mill-streams or moats or 
cow-ponds any longer’ Where are the English coarse fish now’ When I was a 
kid every pond and stream had fish in it Now all the ponds are drained, and 
when the streams aren’t poisoned with chemicals from factories they’re full of 
rusty tins and motor-bike tyres 

My best fishing-memory is about some fish that I never caught That’s usual 
enough, I suppose. 

When I was about fourteen Father did a good turn of some kind to old 
Hodges, the caretaker at Bmfield House I forget what it was-gave him some 
medicine that cured his fowls of the worms, or something Hodges was a 
crabby old devil, but he didn’t forget a good turn. One day a little while 
afterwards when he’d been down to the shop to buy chicken-com he met me 
outside the door and stopped me in his surly way He had a face like something 
carved out of a bit of root, and only two teeth, which were dark brown and very 
long 

"Hey, young ’un ! Fisherman, ain’t you?’ 

"Yes ’ 

"Thought you was You listen, then. If so be you wanted to, you could bring 
your line and have a try in that they* pool up ahind the Hall. There’s pleo^f 
bream and jack in there. But don’t you tefi noone as I told you And dooftyou 
go for to bring any of them other youngwhetps, or I’ll beat the skm off their 



474 Coming up for Air 

Having said this he hobbled off with his sack of corn over his shoulder, as 
though feeling that he’d said too much already The next Saturday afternoon I 
hiked up to Binfield House with my pockets full of worms and gentles, and 
looked for old Hodges at the lodge At that time Binfield House had already 
been empty for ten or twenty years Mr Farrel, the owner, couldn’t afford to 
live m it and either couldn’t or wouldn’t let it He lived m London on the rent 
of his farms and let the house and grounds go to the devil All the fences were 
green and rotting, the park was a mass of nettles, the plantations were like a 
jungle, and even the gardens had gone back to meadow, with only a few old 
gnarled rose-bushes to show you where the beds had been But it was a very 
beautiful house, especially from a distance It was a great white place with 
colonnades and long-shaped windows, which had been built, I suppose, about 
Queen Anne’s time by someone who’d travelled m Italy If I went there now 
I’d probably get a certain kick out of wandering round the general desolation 
and thinking about the life that used to go on there, and the people who built 
such places because they imagined that the good days would last for ever As a 
boy I didn’t give either the house or the grounds a second look I dug out old 
Hodges, who’d just finished his dinner and was a bit surly, and got him to show 
me the way down to the pool It was several hundred yards behind the house 
and completely hidden m the beech woods, but it was a good-sized pool, 
almost a lake, about a hundred and fifty yards across It was astonishing, and 
even at that age it astomshed me, that there, a dozen miles from Reading and 
not fifty from London, you could have such solitude You felt as much alone as 
if you’d been on the banks of the Amazon. The pool was ringed completely 
round by the enormous beech trees, which in one place came down to the edge 
and were reflected in the water On the other side there was a patch of grass 
where there was a hollow with beds of wild peppermint, and up at one end of 
the pool an old wooden boathouse was rotting among the bulrushes 

The pool was swarming with bream, small ones, about four to six inches 
long Every now and again you’d see one of them turn half over and gleam 
reddy brown under the water There were pike there too, and they must have 
been big ones You never saw them, but sometimes one that was basking 
among the weeds would turn over and plunge with a splash that was like a brick 
being bunged mto the water It was no use trying to catch them, though of 
course I always tried every time I went there I tried them- with dace and 
minnows I’d caught m the Thames and kept alive m a jam-jJf, ahdeven with a 
spinner made out of a bit of tin But they were gorged with fish and wouldn’t 
bite, and m any case they’d have broken any tackle I possessed I never came 
back from the pool without at least a dozen small bream Sometimes in the 
summer holidays I went there for a whole day, with my fishing-rod and a copy 
of Chums or the Union Jack or something, and a hunk of bread and cheese 
which Mother had wrapped up for me. And I’ve fished for hours and then lam 
in the grass holloa and read the Union Jack, and then the smell of my bread 
paste and the plopW&fish jumping somewhere would send me wild again, and 
Pd go Water and have another go, and so on all through a summer’s 

day And tie best of all was to be alone, utterly alone, though the road wasn’t a 



Coming up for Air 475 

quarter of a mile away I was just old enough to know that it’s good to be alone 
occasionally With the trees all round you it was as though the pool belonged to 
you, and nothing ever stirred except the fish ringing the water and the pigeons 
passing overhead And yet, m the two years or so that I went fishing there, how 
many times did I really go, I wonder’ Not more than a dozen It was a three- 
mile bike ride from home and took up a whole afternoon at least And 
sometimes other things turned up, and sometimes when I’d meant to go it 
rained You know the way things happen 

One afternoon the fish weren’t biting and I began to explore at the end of the 
pool farthest from Bmfield House There was a bit of an overflow of water and 
the ground was boggy, and you had to fight your way through a sort of jungle 
of blackberry bushes and rotten boughs that had fallen off the trees I struggled 
through it for about fifty yards, and then suddenly there was a clearing and I 
came to another pool which I had never known existed It was a small pool not 
more than twenty yards wide, and rather dark because of the boughs that 
overhung it But it was very clear water and immensely deep I could see ten or 
fifteen feet down into it I hung about for a bit, enjoying the dampness and the 
rotten boggy smell, the way a boy does And then I saw something that almost 
made me jump out of my skin 

It was an enormous fish I don’t exaggerate when I say it was enormous It 
was almost the length of my arm It glided across the pool, deep under water, 
and then became a shadow and disappeared into the darker water on the other 
side I felt as if a sword had gone through me It was far the biggest fish I’d ever 
seen, dead or alive I stood there without breathing, and in a moment another 
huge thick shape glided through the water, and then another and then two 
more close together The pool was full of them They were carp, I suppose 
Just possibly they were bream or tench, but more probably carp Bream or 
tench wouldn’t grow so huge I knew what had happened At some time this 
pool had been connected with the other, and then the stream had dried up and 
the woods had closed round the small pool and it had just been forgotten. It’s a 
thing that happens occasionally A pool gets forgotten somehow, nobody fishes 
m it for years and decades and the fish grow to monstrous sizes The brutes 
that I was watching might be a hundred years old And not a soul m the world 
knew about them except me Very likely it was twenty years since anyone had 
so much as looked at the pool, and probably even old Hodges and Mr Farrel’s 
bailiff had forgotten its existence 

Well, you can imagine what I felt. After a bit I couldn’t even bear the 
tantahzation of watching. I hurried back to the other pool and got my fishing 
things together It was no use trying for those colossal brutes with the tackle I 
had They’d snap it as if it had been a hair And I couldn’t go on fishing any 
longer for the tmy bream The sight of the big carp had given me a feeling in 
my stomach almost as if I was going to be sick. I got on to my bike and whizzed 
down the hill and home It was a wonderful secret for a boy to have. There was 
the dark pool hidden away in the woods and the monstrous fish sailing found 
lt-fish that had never been fished fox and would grab the first bait you offered 
them It was only a question of getting hold of a fine strong enough to hold 



47 6 Coming up for Air 

them Already I’d made all the arrangements I’d buy the tackle that would 
hold them if I had to steal the money out of the till Somehow, God knew how. 
I’d get hold of half a crown and buy a length of silk salmon line and some thick 
gut or gimp and Number 5 hooks, and come back with cheese and gentles and 
paste and mealworms and brandlings and grasshoppers and every mortal bait a 
carp might look at The very next Saturday afternoon I’d come back and try 
for them 

But as it happened I never went back One never does go back I never stole 
the money out of the till or bought the bit of salmon line or had a try for those 
carp Almost immediately afterwards something turned up to prevent me, but 
if it hadn’t been that it would have been something else It’s the way things 
happen 

I know, of course, that you think I’m exaggerating about the size of those 
fish You think, probably, that they were just medium-sized fish (a foot long, 
say) and that they’ve swollen gradually in my memory But it isn’t so People 
tell lies about the fish they’ve caught and still more about the fish that are 
hooked and get away, but I never caught any of these or even tried to catch 
them, and I’ve no motive for lying I tell you they were enormous 


5 

Fishing 1 

Here I’ll make a confession, or rather two The first is that when I look back 
through my life I can’t honestly say that anything I’ve ever done has given me 
quite such a kick as fishing Everything else has been a bit of a flop m 
comparison, even women I don’t set up to be one of those men that don’t care 
about women I’ve spent plenty of time chasing them, and I would even now if 
I had the chance Still, if you gave me the choice of having any woman you care 
to name, but I mean any woman, or catching a ten-pound carp, the carp would 
win every time And the other confession is that after I was sixteen I never 
fished again 

Why^ Because that’s how things happen Because m this life wf?|Sad-I don’t 
mean human life m general, I mean life in this particular age and this particular 
country-we don’t do the things we want to do. It isn’t because we’re always 
working Even a farm-hand or a Jew tailor isn’t always working It’s because 
there’s some devil in us that drives us to and fro on everlasting idiocies 
There’s time for everything except the things worth doing Think of 
something you really care about Then add hour to hour and calculate the 
fraction of your life that you’ve actually spent in doing it And then calculate 
the time ijou^e apept op things like shaving, riding to and fro on buses, 
waiting ip r railway. Junctions, swapping dirty stories, and reading the 



Coming up for Air 477 

After I was sixteen I didn’t go fishing again There never seemed to be time 
I was at work, I was chasing girls, I was wearing my first button boots and my 
first high collars (and for the collars of 1909 you needed a neck like a giraffe), I 
was doing correspondence courses m salesmanship and accountancy and 
‘improving my mind’ The great fish were gliding round in the pool behind 
Binfield House Nobody knew about them except me They were stored away 
m my mmd, some day, some bank holiday perhaps,. I’d go back and catch 
them But I never went back There was time for everything except that 
Curiously enough, the only time between then and now when I did very nearly 
go fishing was during the war 

It was in the autumn of 1916, just before I was wounded We’d come out of 
trenches to a village behind the line, and though it was only September we 
were covered with mud from head to foot As usual we didn’t know for certain 
how long we were going to stay there or where we were going afterwards 
Luckily the C O was a bit off-colour, a touch of bronchitis or something, and 
so didn’t bother about driving us through the usual parades, kit-inspections, 
football matches, and so forth which were supposed to keep up the spirits of 
the troops when they were out of the line We spent the first day sprawling 
about on piles of chaff in the barns where we were billeted and scraping the 
mud off our putties, and m the evening some of the chaps started queueing up 
for a couple of wretched worn-out whores who were established m a house at 
the end of the village In the morning, although it was against orders to leave 
the village, I managed to sneak off and wander round the ghastly desolation 
that had once been fields It was a damp, wintry kind of morning Allround, of 
course, were the awful muck and litter of war, the sort of filthy sordid mess 
that’s actually worse than a battlefield of corpses Trees with boughs torn off 
them, old shell-holes that had partly filled up again, tin cans, turds, mud, 
weeds, clumps of rusty barbed wire with weeds growing through them You 
know the feeling you had when you came out of the line A stiffened feeling in 
all your joints, and inside you a kind of emptiness, a feeling that you’d never 
again have any interest m anything It was partly fear and exhaustion but 
mainly boredom At that time no one saw any reason why the war shouldn’t go 
on for ever Today or tomorrow or the day after you were going back to the 
line, and maybe next week a shell would blow you to potted meat, but that 
wasn’t so bad as the ghastly boredom of the war stretching out for ever 

I was wandering up the side of a hedge when I ran into a chap in our 
company whose surname I don’t remember but who was nicknamed Nobby 
He was a dark, slouching, gypsy-looking chap, a chap who even m uniform 
always gave the impression that he was carrying a couple of stolen rabbits By 
trade he was a coster and he was a real Cockney, but one of those Cockneys that 
make part of their Irving by hop-picking, bird-catchmg, poaching, and fruit- 
stealmg in Kent and Essex He was a great expert on dogs, ferrets, cage-birds, 
fighting-cocks, and that kind of thing As soon as he saw me he beckoned to me 
with his head He had a sly; vicious way of talking* 

* ’Ere, George*’ (The chaps still called me George-I hadn’t got fat in those 
days ) ‘George* Ja see thatdump of poplars acrost the fiekP’ 



Coming up for Air 


478 

‘Yes’ 

‘Well, there’s a pool on t’other side of it, and it’s full of bleeding great fish ’ 

‘Fish ? Gam 1 ’ 

‘I tell you it’s bleeding full of ’em Perch, they are As good fish as ever I got 
my thumbs on Com’n see f yerself, then ’ 

We trudged over the mud together Sure enough. Nobby was right On the 
other side of the poplars there was a dirty-looking pool with sandy banks 
Obviously it had been a quarry and had got filled up with water And it was 
swarming with perch You could see their dark blue stripy backs gliding 
everywhere just under water, and some of them must have weighed a pound I 
suppose in two years of war they hadn’t been disturbed and had had time to 
multiply Probably you can’t imagine what the sight of those perch had done to 
me It was as though they’d suddenly brought me to life Of course there was 
only one thought m both our mmds-how to get hold of a rod and line 

‘Christ 1 ’ I said ‘We’ll have some of those ’ 

‘You bet we f — well will C’mon back to the village and let’s get ’old of some 
tackle.’ 

‘O K You want to watch out, though If the sergeant gets to know we’ll cop 

it ’ 

‘Oh, f — the sergeant They can ’ang, drore, and quarter me if they want to 
I’m going to ’ave some of them bleeding fish ’ 

You can’t know how wild we were to catch those fish Or perhaps you can, if 
you’ve ever been at war You know the frantic boredom of war and the way 
you’ll clutch at almost any kind of amusement I’ve seen two chaps in a dugout 
fight like devils over half a threepenny magazine But there was more to it than 
that It was the thought of escaping, for perhaps a whole day, right out of the 
atmosphere of war To be sitting under the poplar trees, fishing for perch, 
away from the Company, away from the noise and the stink and the uniforms 
and the officers and the saluting and the sergeant’s voice' Fishing is the 
opposite of war But it wasn’t at all certain that we could bring it off That was 
the thought that sent us into a kind of fever If the sergeant found out he’d stop 
us as sure as fate, and so would any of the officers, and the worst of all was that 
there was no knowing how long we were going to stay at the village. We might 
stay there a week, we might march off m two hours Meanwhile we’d no fishing 
tackle of any kind, not even a pm* or a bit of string, ‘We had to start from 
scratch. And the pool was swarming with fish! The first thing was a rod A 
willow wand is best, but of course there wasn’t a willow tree anywhere this side 
of the horizon Nobby shinned up one of the poplars and cut off a small bough 
which wasn’t actually good but was better than nothing He trimmed it down 
with his jack-knife till it looked something like a fishing-rod, and then we hid it 
m the weeds near the bank and managed to sneak back into the village without 
being seen. 

The next thing was a needle to make a hook Nobody had a needle One chap 
had some darning needles, but they were too thick and had blunt ends. We 
dais^t &t anyone know what we wanted it for, for fear the sergeant should 
hear about It, At hist we thought of the whores at the end Of the village They 



Coming up for Air 479 

were pretty sure to have a needle When we got there-you had to go round to 
the back door through a mucky courtyard-the house was shut up and the 
whores were having a sleep which they’d no doubt earned We stamped and 
yelled and banged on the door until after about ten minutes a fat ugly woman 
in a wrapper came down and screamed at us in French Nobby shouted at her 
‘Needle 1 Needle 1 You got a needle 1 ’ 

Of course she didn’t know what he was talking about Then Nobby tried 
pidgin English, which he expected her as a foreigner to understand 
‘Wantee needle* Sewee clothee 1 Likee thisee*’ 

He made gestures which were supposed to represent sewing The whore 
misunderstood him and opened the door a bit wider to let us m Finally we 
made her understand and got a needle from her By this time it was dinner 
time 

After dinner the sergeant came round the barn where we were billeted 
looking for men for a fatigue We managed to dodge him just m time by getting 
under a pile of chaff When he was gone we got a candle alight, made the needle 
red-hot, and managed to bend it into a kind of hook We didn’t have any tools 
except jack-kmves, and we burned our fingers badly The next thing was a line 
Nobody had any string except thick stuff, but at last we came across a fellow 
who had a reel of sewing thread He didn’t want to part with it and we had to 
give him a whole packet of fags for it The thread was much too thin, but 
Nobby cut it into three lengths, tied them to a nail in the wall, and carefully 
plaited them Meanwhile after searching all over the village I’d managed to 
find a cork, and I cut it in half and stuck a match through it to make a float By 
this time it was evening and getting on towards dark 
We’d got the essentials now, but we could do with some gut There didn’t 
seem much hope of getting any until we thought of the hospital orderly 
Surgical gut wasn’t part of his equipment, but it was just possible that he 
might have some Sure enough, when we asked him, we found he’d a whole 
hank of medical gut in his haversack It had taken his fancy m some hospital or 
other and he’d pinched it We swapped another packet of fags for ten lengths of 
gut It was rotten brittle stuff, m pieces about six inches long After dark 
Nobby soaked them till they were pliable and tied them end to end So now 
we’d got every thmg-hook, rod, line, float, and gut We could dig up worms 
anywhere And the pool was swarming with fish 1 Huge great stripy perch 
crying out to be caught* We lay down to kip in such a fever that we didn’t even 
take our boots off Tomorrow* If we could j*ust have tomorrow* If the war 
would forget about us for just a day! We made up our minds that as soon as 
roll-call was over we’d hook it and stay away all day, even if they gave us Field 
Punishment No 1 fbr it when we came back 
Well, I expect you can guess the rest At roll-call orders were to pack all kits 
and be ready to march in twenty minutes We marched mne miles down the 
road and then got on to lorries and were off to another part of the line. As fbr 
the pool under the poplar trees, I never saw or heard of it again. I expect it got 
poisoned with mustard gas later an 

Since then I’ve never fished. I never seemed to get the chance* There was 



480 Corning up for Air 

the rest of the war, and then like everyone else I was fighting for a job, and then 
I’d got a job and the job had got me I was a promismg young fellow m an 
insurance office-one of those keen young businessmen with firm jaws and 
good prospects that you used to read about m the Clark’s College adverts-and 
then I was the usual down-trodden five-to-ten-pounds-a-weeker m a semi- 
detached villa in the inner-outer suburbs Such people don’t go fishing, any 
more than stockbrokers go out pickmg primroses It wouldn’t be suitable 
Other recreations are provided for them 
Of course I have my fortnight’s holiday every summer You know the kind 
of holiday Margate, Yarmouth, Eastbourne, Hastings, Bournemouth, 
Brighton There’s a slight variation according to whether or not we’re flush 
that year With a woman like Hilda along, the chief feature of a holiday is 
endless mental arithmetic to decide how much the boardmg-house keeper is 
swindling you That and telling the kids, No, they can’t have a new 
sandbucket A few years back we were at Bournemouth One fine afternoon we 
loitered down the pier, which must be about half a mile long, and all the way 
along it chaps were fishing with stumpy sea-rods with little bells on the end 
and their lines stretching fifty yards out to sea It’s a dull kind of fishing, and 
they weren’t catching anything Still, they were fishing The kids soon got 
bored and clamoured to go back to the beach, and Hilda saw a chap sticking a 
lobworm on his hook and said it made her feel sick, but I kept loitering up and 
down for a little while longer And suddenly there was a tremendous ringing 
from a bell and a chap was winding in his line Everyone stopped to watch And 
sure enough, m it came, the wet line and the lump of lead and on the end a great 
flat-fish (a flounder, I think) dangling and wriggling The chap dumped it on 
to the planks of the pier, and it flapped up and down, all wet and gleaming, 
with its grey warty back and its white belly and the fresh salty smell of the sea 
And something kind of moved inside me 
As we moved off I said casually, just to test Hilda’s reaction 
‘I’ve half a mind to do a bit of fishing myself while we’re here 5 
‘What 1 You go fishing, George^ But you don’t even know how, do you^’ 
‘Oh, I used to be a great fisherman,’ I told her. 

She was vaguely against it, as usual, but didn’t have many ideas one way or 
the other, except that if I went fishing she wasn’t comong with me to watch me 
put those nasty squashy things on the hook Then suddenly she got on to the 
fact that if I was to go fishing the set-out that I’d need, rod and reel and so 
forth, would cost round about a quid The rod alone would cost ten bob 
Instantly she flew into a temper. You haven’t seen old Hilda when there’s talk 
of wasting ten bob She burst out at me 
‘The idaa of wasting all that money on a thing like that 1 Absurd 1 And how 
they dare charge ten shillings for one of those silly little fishing-rods 1 It’s 
disgraceful And fancy you going fishing at your age! A great big grown-up 
man like you, Don’t be such a baby , George.’ 
vThcn tin kidsgot on to it, Loma sidled up to me and asked in that silly pert 
' way she has, ‘Are you a baby, Daddy ^ and little Billy, who at that time didn’t 
^e^quite plain, announced to the world m general, ‘Farver’s a baby ’ Then 



Coming up for Air 481 

suddenly they were both dancing round me, rattling their sandbuckets and 
chanting 

‘Farver’s a baby* Farver’s a baby 1 ’ 

Unnatural little bastards 1 


6 


And besides fishing there was reading 

Fve exaggerated if I’ve given the impression that fishing was the only thing I 
cared about Fishing certainly came first, but reading was a good second I 
must have been either ten or eleven when I started reading-reading 
voluntarily, I mean At that age it’s like discovering a new world I’m a 
considerable reader even now, in fact there aren’t many weeks in which I don’t 
get through a couple of novels I’m what you might call the typical Boots 
Library subscriber, I always fall for the best-seller of the moment ( The Good 
Companions , Bengal Lancer , Hatter’s Castle-I fell for every one of them), and 
I’ve been a member of the Left Book Club for a year or more And m 1918, 
when I was twenty-five, I had a sort of debauch of reading that made a certain 
difference to my outlook But nothing is ever like those first years when you 
suddenly discover that you can open a penny weekly paper and plunge straight 
into thieves’ kitchens and Chinese opium dens and Polynesian islands and the 
forests of Brazil 

It was from when I was eleven to when I was about sixteen that I got my 
biggest kick out of reading At first it was always the boys’ penny 
weeklies-little thin papers with vile print and an illustration in three colours 
on the eover-and a bit later it was books Sherlock Holmes , Dr Nikola, The Iron 
Pirate, Dracula, Raffles And Nat Gould and Ranger Gull and a chap whose 
name I forget who wrote boxing stories almost as rapidly as Nat Gould wrote 
racing ones I suppose if my parents had been a little better educated I’d have 
had ‘good’ books shoved down my throat, Dickens and Thackeray and so 
forth, and in fact they did drive us through Quentin Durward at school and 
Uncle Ezekiel sometimes tried to incite me to read Ruskm and Carlyle But 
there were practically no books in our house Father had never read a book m 
his life, except the Bible and Smiles ’s Self Help, and I didn’t of my own accord 
read a ‘good’ book till much later I’m not sorry it happened that way I read 
the things I wanted to read, and I got more out of them than I ever got out of 
the stuff they taught me at school 

The old penny dreadfuls were already going out when I was a kid, and I can 
barely remember them, but there was a regular line of boys’ weeklies, some of 
which still exist The Buffalo Bill stories have gone out, I think, and Nat Gould 
probably isn’t read any longer, but Nick Carter and Sexton Blake seem to be 



482 Coming up for Air 

still the same as ever The Gem and the Magnet, if I’m remembering rightly, 
started about 1905 The BOP was still rather pi m those days, but Chums , 
which I think must have started about 1903, was splendid Then there was an 
encyclopedia-I don’t remember its exact name-which was issued in penny 
numbers It never seemed quite worth buying, but a boy at school used to give 
away back numbers sometimes If I now know the length of the Mississippi or 
the difference between an octopus and a cuttle-fish or the exact composition of 
bell-metal, that’s where I learned it from 

Joe never read He was one of those boys who can go through years of 
schooling and at the end of it are unable to read ten lines consecutively The 
sight of print made him feel sick I’ve seen him pick up one of my numbers of 
Chums, read a paragraph or two and then turn away with just the same 
movement of disgust as a horse when it smells stale hay He tried to kick me out 
of reading, but Mother and Father, who had decided that I was ‘the clever 
one’, backed me up They were rather proud that I showed a taste for ‘book- 
learning’, as they called it But it was typical of both of them that they were 
vaguely upset by my reading things like Chums and the Union Jack, thought 
that I ought to read something ‘improving’ but didn’t know enough about 
books to be sure which books were ‘improving’ Finally Mother got hold of a 
second-hand copy of Foxe’s Book of Martyrs, which I didn’t read, though the 
illustrations weren’t half bad 

All through the winter of 1905 I spent a penny on Chums every week I was 
following up their serial story, ‘Donovan the Dauntless’ Donovan the 
Dauntless was an explorer who was employed by an American millionaire to 
fetch incredible things from various corners of the earth Sometimes it was 
diamonds the size of golf balls from the craters of volcanoes m Africa, 
sometimes it was petrified mammoths’ tusks from the frozen forests of Siberia, 
sometimes it was buried Inca treasures from the lost cities of Peru Donovan 
went on a new journey every week, and he always made good. My favourite 
place for reading was the loft behind the yard Except when Father was getting 
out fresh sacks of gram it was the quietest place in the house There were huge 
piles of sacks to lie on, and a sort of plastery smell mixed up with the smell of 
sainfoin, and bunches of cobwebs in all the corners, and just over the place 
where I used to he there was a hole m the ceiling and a lath sticking out of the 
plaster I can feel the feeling of it now A winter day, just warm enough to lie 
still I’m lying on my belly with Chums open in front of me A mouse runs up 
the side of a sack like a clockwork toy, then suddenly stops dead and watches 
me with his little eyes like tiny jet beads. I’m twelve years old, but I’m 
Donovan the Dauntless Two thousand miles up the Amazon I’ve just pitched 
my tent, and the roots of the mysterious orchid that blooms once in a hundred 
years are safe in the tin box under my camp bed In the forests all round Hopi- 
Hopi Indians, who paint their teeth scarlet and skin white men alive, are 
beating their war-drums I’m watching the mouse and the mouse is watching 
me, and I can smell the dust and sainfoin and the cool plastery smell, and I’m 
up the Amazon, and it’s bliss, pure bliss 



7 


That’s all, really 

I’ve tried to tell you something about the world before the war, the world I 
got a sniff of when I saw King Zog’s name on the poster, and the chances are 
that I’ve told you nothing Either you remember before the war and don’t need 
to be told about it, or you don’t remember, and it’s no use telling you So far 
I’ve only spoken about the things that happened to me before I was sixteen 
Up to that time things had gone pretty well with the family It was a bit before 
my sixteenth birthday that I began to get glimpses of what people call ‘real 
life’, meaning unpleasantness 

About three days after I’d seen the big carp at Binfield House, Father came 
in to tea looking very worried and even more grey and mealy than usual He ate 
his way solemnly through his tea and didn’t talk much In those days he had a 
rather preoccupied way of eating, and his moustache used to work up and 
down with a sidelong movement, because he hadn’t many back teeth left I was 
just getting up from table when he called me back 

‘Wait a minute, George, my boy I got suthmg to say to you Sit down jest a 
minute Mother, you heard what I got to say last night ’ 

Mother, behind the huge brown teapot, folded her hands m her lap and 
looked solemn Father went on, speaking very seriously but rather spoiling the 
effect by trying to deal with a crumb that lodged somewhere in what was left of 
his back teeth 

‘George, my boy, I got suthmg to say to you, I been thinking it over, and it’s 
about tune you left school ’Fraid you’ll have to get to work now and start 
earmng a bit to brmg home to your mother I wrote to Mr Wicksey last night 
and told him as I should have to take you away ’ 

Of course this was quite according to precedent-his writing to Mr Wicksey 
before telling me, I mean Parents m those days, as a matter of course, always 
arranged everything over their children’s heads 
Father went on to make some rather mumbling and worried explanations 
He’d ‘had bad times lately’, things had ‘been a bit difficult’, and the upshot was 
that Joe and I would have to start earning our living At that time I didn’t 
either know or greatly care whether the business was really in a bad way or not 
I hadn’t even enough commercial instinct to see the reason why things were 
‘ difficult’. The fact was that Father had been hit by competition Sarazins’, the 
big retail seedsmen who had branches all over the home counties, had stuck a 
tentacle into Lower Binfield. Six months earlier they’d taken the lease of a 



484 Coming up for Air 

shop m the market-place and dolled it up until what with bright green paint, 
gilt lettering, gardemng tools painted red and green, and huge advertisements 
for sweet peas, it hit you in the eye at a hundred yards’ distance Sarazms’, 
besides selling flower seeds, described themselves as ‘universal poultry and 
livestock providers’, and apart from wheat and oats and so forth they went in 
for patent poultry mixtures, bird-seed done up m fancy packets, dog-biscuits 
of all shapes and colours, medicines, embrocations, and conditioning powders, 
and branched off into such things as rat-traps, dog-chains, incubators, sanitary 
eggs, bird-nesting, bulbs, weed-killer, insecticide, and even, in some 
branches, into what they called a ‘livestock department’, meaning rabbits and 
day-old chicks Father, with his dusty old shop and his refusal to stock new 
lines, couldn’t compete with that kind of thing and didn’t want to The 
tradesmen with their van-horses, and such of the farmers as dealt with the 
retail seedsmen, fought shy of Sarazms’, but m six months they’d gathered in 
the petty gentry of the neighbourhood, who m those days had carriages or 
dogcarts and therefore horses This meant a big loss of trade for Father and the 
other corn merchant, Winkle I didn’t grasp any of this at the time I had a 
boy’s attitude towards it all I’d never taken any interest m the business I’d 
never or hardly ever served in the shop, and when, as occasionally happened, 
Father wanted me to run an errand or give a hand with something, such as 
hoisting sacks of gram up to the loft or down again, I’d always dodged it 
whenever possible Boys in our class aren’t such complete babies as public 
schoolboys, they know that work is work and sixpence is sixpence, but it seems 
natural for a boy to regard his father’s business as a bore Up till that time 
fishing-rods, bicycles, fizzy lemonade, and so forth had seemed to me a good 
deal more real than anything that happened m the grown-up world 
Father had already spoken to old Grimmett, the grocer, who wanted a smart 
lad and was willing to take me into the shop immediately Meanwhile Father 
was going to get rid of the errand boy, and Joe was to come home and help with 
the shop till he got a regular job Joe had left school some time back and had 
been more or less loafing ever since Father had sometimes talked of ‘getting 
him into’ the accounts department at the brewery, and earlier had even had 
thoughts of making him mto an auctioneer Both were completely hopeless 
because Joe, at seventeen, wrote a hand like a ploughboy and couldn’t repeat 
the multiplication table At present he was supposed to be ‘learning the trade’ 
at a big bicycle shop on the outskirts of Walton Tinkering with bicycles suited 
Joe, who, like most half-wits, had a slight mechanical turn, but he was quite 
incapable of workmg steadily and sp entail his time loafing about m greasy 
overalls, smoking Woodbines, getting into fights, drinking (he’s started that 
already), getting ‘talked of with one girl after another, and sticking Father for 
money Father was worried, puzzled, and vaguely resentful I can see him yet, 
with the meal on his bald head, and the bit of grey hair over his ears, and his 
spectacles and his grey moustache. He couldn’t understand what was 
happening to him For years his profits had gone up, slowly and steadily, ten 
pounds tins year, twenty pounds that year, and now suddenly they’d gone 
down with a bump. He couldn’t understand it He’d inherited the business 



Coming up for Air 48 s 

from his father, he’d done an honest trade, worked hard, sold sound goods, 
swindled nobody-and his profits were going down He said a number of times, 
between sucking at his teeth to get the crumb out, that times were very bad, 
trade seemed very slack, he couldn’t think what had come over people, it 
wasn’t as if the horses didn’t have to eat. Perhaps it was these here motors, he 
decided finally ‘Nasty smelly things’’ Mother put m She was a little worried, 
and knew that she ought to be more so Once or twice while Father was talking 
there was a far-away look m her eyes and I could see her lips moving She was 
trying to decide whether it should be a round of beef and carrots tomorrow or 
another leg of mutton Except when there was something in her own line that 
needed foresight, such as buying linen or saucepans, she wasn’t really capable 
of thinking beyond tomorrow’s meals The shop was giving trouble and Father 
was worned-that was about as far as she saw into it None of us had any grasp 
of what was happening Father had had a bad year and lost money, but was he 
really frightened by the future’ I don’t think so This was 1909, remember He 
didn’t know what was happening to him, he wasn’t capable of foreseeing that 
these Sarazin people would systematically under-sell him, rum him, and eat 
him up How could he’ Things hadn’t happened like that when he was a young 
man All he knew was that times were bad, trade was very ‘slack’, very ‘slow’ 
(he kept repeating these phrases), but probably things would ‘look up 
presently’ 

It would be mce if I could tell you that I was a great help to my father m his 
time of trouble, suddenly proved myself a man, and developed qualities which 
no one had suspected in me-and so on and so forth, like the stuff you used to 
read m the uplift novels of thirty years ago Or alternatively I’d like to be able 
to record that I bitterly resented having to leave school, my eager young mind, 
yearning for knowledge and refinement, recoiled from the soulless mechanical 
job into which they were thrusting me-and so on and so forth, like the stuff 
you read m the uplift novels today Both would be complete bunkum The 
truth is that I was pleased and excited at the idea of going to work, especially 
when I grasped that Old Grimmett was going to pay me real wages, twelve 
shillings a week, of which I could keep four for myself. The big carp at Bmfield 
House, which had filled my mind for three days past, faded right out of it I’d 
no objection to leaving school a few terms early It generally happened the 
same way with boys at our school A boy was always ‘going to’ go to Reading 
University, or study to be an engineer, or ‘go into business’ in London, or run 
away to sea-and then suddenly, at two days’ notice, he’d disappear from 
school, and a fortnight later you’d meet him on a bicycle, delivering 
vegetables Within five minutes of Father telling me that I should have to leave 
school I was wondering about the new suit I should wear to go to work in I 
instantly started demanding a ‘grown-up suit’, with a kind of coat that was 
fashionable at that time, a ‘cutaway’, I think it was called Of course both 
Mother and Father were scandalized and said they’d ‘never heard of such a 
thing’ For some reason that I’ve never fully fathomed, parents in those days 
always tried to prevent their children wearing grown-up clothes as long as 
possible In every family there was a stand-up fight before a boy had his first 



486 Coming up for Air 

tall collars or a girl put her hair up 

So the conversation veered away from Father’s business troubles and 
degenerated into a long, nagging kind of argument, with Father gradually 
getting angry and repeating over and over-dropping an aitch now and again, 
as he was apt to do when he got angry-‘Well, you can’t ’ave it Make up your 
mind to that-you can’t ’ave it ’ So I didn’t have my ‘cutaway’, but went to 
work for the first time m a ready-made black suit and a broad collar m which I 
looked an overgrown lout Any distress I felt over the whole business really 
arose from that Joe was even more selfish about it He was furious at having to 
leave the bicycle shop, and for the short time that he remained at home he 
merely loafed about, made a nuisance of himself and was no help to Father 
whatever 

I worked in old Grimmett’s shop for nearly six years Gnmmett was a fine, 
upstanding, white- whiskered old chap, like a rather stouter version of Uncle 
Ezekiel, and like Uncle Ezekiel a good Liberal But he was less of a firebrand 
and more respected in the town He’d trimmed his sails during the Boer War, 
he was a bitter enemy of trade unions and once sacked an assistant for 
possessing a photograph of Keir Hardie, and he was ‘chapel’ -in fact he was a 
big noise, literally, in the Baptist Chapel, known locally as the Tm 
Tab-whereas my family were ‘church’ and Uncle Ezekiel was an infidel at 
that Old Gnmmett was a town councillor and an official at the local Liberal 
Party With his white whiskers, his canting talk about liberty of conscience and 
the Grand Old Man, his thumping bank balance, and the extempore prayers 
you could sometimes hear him letting loose when you passed the Tin Tab, he 
was a little like a legendary Nonconformist grocer m the story-you’ve heard it, 
I expect 

‘James'* 

‘Yessir?’ 

‘Have you sanded the sugar?’ 

‘Yessir 1 ’ 

‘Have you watered the treacle?’ 

‘Yessir 1 ’ 

‘Then come up to prayers ’ 

God knows how often I heard that story whispered in the shop We did 
actually start the day with a prayer before we put up the shutters Not that old 
Gnmmett sanded the sugar He knew that that doesn’t pay But he was a sharp 
man m business, he did all the high-class grocery trade of Lower Bmfield and 
the country round, and he had three assistants m the shop besides the errand 
boy, the van-man, and his own daughter (he was a widower) who acted as 
cashier I was the errand boy for my first six months Then one of the assistants 
left to ‘set up’ in Reading and I moved into the shop and wore my first white 
apron I learned to tie a parcel, pack a bag of currants, grind coffee, work the 
bacon-slicer, carve ham, put an edge on a knife, sweep the floor, dust eggs 
without breaking them, pass off an inferior article as a good one, clean a 
window, judge a pound of cheese by eye, open a packing-case, whack a slab of 
butter into shape, and- what was a good deal the hardest-remember where the 



Coming up for Air 487 

stock was kept I haven’t such detailed memories of grocermg as I have of 
fishmg 3 but I remember a good deal To this day I know the trick of snapping a 
bit of string in my fingers If you put me in front of a bacon-slicer I could work 
it better than I can a typewriter I could spin you some pretty fair technicalities 
about grades of China tea and what margarine is made of and the average 
weight of eggs and the price of paper bags per thousand 
Well, for more than five years that was me-an alert young chap with a 
round, pink, snubby kind of face and butter-coloured hair (no longer cut short 
but carefully greased and slicked back m what people used to call a ‘smarm’), 
hustling about behind the counter m a white apron with a pencil behind my 
ear, tying up bags of coffee like lightning and jockeying the customer along 
with ‘Yes, ma’am' Certainly, ma’am' And the next order, ma’am 1 ’ m a voice 
with just a trace of a Cockney accent Old Grimmett worked us pretty hard, it 
was an eleven-hour day except on Thursdays and Sundays, and Christmas 
week was a nightmare Yet it’s a good time to look back on Don’t think that I 
had no ambitions I knew I wasn’t going to remain a grocer’s assistant for ever, 
I was merely ‘learning the trade’ Some time, somehow or other, there’d be 
enough money for me to ‘set up’ on my own That was how people felt m those 
days This was before the war, remember, and before the slumps and before 
the dole The world was big enough for everyone Anyone could ‘set up in 
trade’, there was always room for another shop And time was slipping on 
1909, 1910, 1911 King Edward died and the papers came out with a black 
border round the edge Two cinemas opened in Walton The cars got 
commoner on the roads and cross-country motor-buses began to run An 
aeroplane-a flimsy, rickety-looking thing with a chap sitting m the middle on a 
kind of chair-flew over Lower Binfield and the whole town rushed out of their 
houses to yell at it People began to say rather vaguely that this here German 
Emperor was getting too big for his boots and ‘it’ (meaning war with 
Germany) was ‘coming some time’ My wages went gradually up, until finally, 
just before the war, they were twenty-eight shillings a week I paid Mother ten 
shillings a week for my board, and later, when times got worse, fifteen 
shillings, and even that left me feeling richer than I’ve felt since I grew 
another inch, my moustache began to sprout, I wore button boots and collars 
three inches high In church on Sundays, in my natty dark grey suit, with my 
bowler hat and black dogskin gloves on the pew beside me, I looked the perfect 
gent, so that Mother could hardly contain her pride m me In between work 
and ‘walking out’ on Thursdays, and thinking about clothes and girls, I had fits 
of ambition and saw myself developing into a Big Business Man like Lever or 
William Whiteley Between sixteen and eighteen I made serious efforts to 
‘improve my mind’ and tram myself for a business career I cured myself of 
dropping aitches and got rid of most of my Cockney accent (In the Thames 
Valley the country accents were going out Except for the farm lads, nearly 
everyone who was born later than 1890 talked Cockney.) I did a 
correspondence course with Littleburns’ Commercial Academy, learnt book- 
keeping and business English, read solemnly through a book of frightful blah 
called The Art of Salesmanship , and improved my arithmetic and even my 



488 Coming up for Air 

handwriting When I was as old as seventeen I’ve sat up late at night with my 
tongue hanging out of my mouth, practising copperplate by the little oil-lamp 
on the bedroom table At times I read enormously, generally crime and 
adventure stories, and sometimes paper -covered books which were furtively 
passed round by the chaps at the shop and described as ‘hot’ (They were 
translations of Maupassant and Paul de Kock ) But when I was eighteen I 
suddenly turned highbrow, got a ticket for the County Library, and began to 
stodge through books by Marie Corelli and Hall Came and Anthony Hope It 
was at about that time that I joined the Lower Bmfield Reading Circle, which 
was run by the vicar and met one evening a week all through the winter for 
what was called ‘literary discussion’ Under pressure from the vicar I read bits 
of Sesame and Lilies and even had a go at Browning 
And time was slipping away 1910, 1911, 1912 And Father’s business was 
going down-not slumping suddenly into the gutter, but it was going down 
Neither Father nor Mother was ever quite the same after Joe ran away from 
home This happened not long after I went to work at Grimmett’s 
Joe, at eighteen, had grown into an ugly ruffian He was a hefty chap, much 
bigger than the rest of the family, with tremendous shoulders, a big head, and a 
sulky, lowering kind of face on which he already had a respectable moustache 
When he wasn’t m the tap-room of the George he was loafing m the shop 
doorway, with his hands dug deep into his pockets, scowling at the people who 
passed, except when they happened to be girls, as though he’d like to knock 
them down If anyone came into the shop he’d move aside just enough to let 
them pass, and, without taking his hands out of his pockets, yell over his 
shoulders ‘Da-ad< Shop' 5 This was as near as he ever got to helping Father and 
Mother said despairingly that they ‘didn’t know what to do with him’, and he 
was costing the devil of a lot with his drinking and endless smoking Late one 
night he walked out of the house and was never heard of again He’d prised 
open the till and taken all the money that was in it, luckily not much, about 
eight pounds. That was enough to get him a steerage passage to America He’d 
always wanted to go to America, and I think he probably did so, though we 
never knew for certain It made a bit of a scandal m the town The official 
theory was that Joe had bolted because he’d put a girl in the family way There 
was a girl named Sally Ghivers who lived m the same street as the Simmonses 
and was going to have a baby, and Joe had certainly been with her, but so had 
about a dozen others, and nobody knew whose baby it was Mother and Father 
accepted the baby theory and even, in private, used it to excuse their ‘poor boy’ 
for stealing the eight pounds and running away They weren’t capable of 
grasping that Joe had cleared out because he couldn’t stand a decent 
respectable life m a little country town and wanted a life of loafing, fights, and 
women, "We never heard of him again Perhaps he went utterly to the bad, 
perhaps he was killed m die war, perhaps he merely didn’t bother to write. 
Luckily the baby was bom dead, so there were no complications As for the 
fact that Joe had stolen the eight pounds. Mother and Father managed to keep 
it a^ecret till they died. In their eyes it was a much worse disgrace than Sally 



Coming up for Air 489 

The trouble over Joe aged Father a great deal To lose Joe was merely to cut 
a loss, but it hurt him and made him ashamed From that time forward his 
moustache was much greyer and he seemed to have grown a lot smaller 
Perhaps my memory of him as a little grey man, with a round, lined, anxious 
face and dusty spectacles, really dates from that time By slow degrees he was 
getting more and more involved m money worries and less and less interested 
in other things He talked less about politics and the Sunday papers, and more 
about the badness of trade Mother seemed to have shrunk a little, too In my 
childhood I’d known her as something vast and overflowing, with her yellow 
hair and her beaming face and her enormous bosom, a sort of great opulent 
creature like the figure-head of a battleship Now she’d got smaller and more 
anxious and older than her years She was less lordly in the kitchen, went in 
more for neck of mutton, worried over the price of coal, and began to use 
margarine, a thing which in the old days she’d never have allowed into the 
house After Joe had gone Father had to hire an errand boy again, but from 
then on he employed very young boys whom he only kept for a year or two and 
who couldn’t lift heavy weights I sometimes lent him a hand when I was at 
home I was too selfish to do it regularly I can still see him working his way 
slowly across the yard, bent double and almost hidden under an enormous 
sack, like a snail under its shell The huge, monstrous sack, weighing a 
hundred and fifty pounds, I suppose, pressing his neck and shoulders almost 
to the ground, and the anxious, spectacled face looking up from underneath it 
In 19 1 1 he ruptured himself and had to spend weeks in hospital and hire a 
temporary manager for the shop, which ate another hole in his capital A small 
shopkeeper going down the hill is a dreadful thing to watch, but it isn’t sudden 
and obvious like the fate of a working man who gets the sack and promptly 
finds himself on the dole It’s just a gradual chipping away of trade, with little 
ups and downs, a few shillings to the bad here, a few sixpences to the good 
there Somebody who’s dealt with you for years suddenly deserts and goes to 
Sarazms’ Somebody else buys a dozen hens and gives you a weekly order for 
corn You can still keep going You’re still ‘your own master’, always a little 
more worried and a little shabbier, with your capital shrinking all the time 
You can go on like that for years, for a lifetime if you’re lucky Uncle Ezekiel 
died m 1 9 1 1 , leaving £120 which must have made a lot of difference to Father 
It wasn’t till 1913 that he had to mortgage his life-insurance policy That I 
didn’t hear about at the time, or I’d have understood what it meant As it was I 
don’t think I ever got further than realizing that Father ‘wasn’t doing well’, 
trade was ‘slack’, there’d be a bit longer to wait before I had the money to ‘set 
up’ Like Father himself, I looked on the shop as something permanent, and I 
was a bit inclined to be angry with him for not managing things better I wasn’t 
capable of seeing, and neither was he nor anyone else, that he was being slowly 
ruined, that his business would never pick up again and if he lived to be 
seventy he’d certainly end m the workhouse Many a time I’ve passed 
Sarazms’ shop in the market-place and merely thought how much I preferred 
their slick window-front to Father’s dusty old shop, with the ‘S. Bowling’ 
which you could* hardly read, the chipped white lettering, and the faded 



490 Coming up for Air 

packets of bird-seed It didn’t occur to me that Sarazins 5 were tapeworms who 
were eating him alive Sometimes I used to repeat to him some of the stuff I’d 
been reading m my correspondence-course textbooks, about salesmanship and 
modern methods He never paid much attention He’d inherited an old- 
established business, he’d always worked hard, done a fair trade, and supplied 
sound goods, and things would look up presently It’s a fact that very few 
shopkeepers m those days actually ended in the workhouse With any luck you 
died with a few pounds still your own It was a race between death and 
bankruptcy, and, thank God, death got Father first, and Mother too 

1911,1912,1913 I tell you it was a good time to be alive It was late in 1912, 
through the vicar’s Reading Circle, that I first met Elsie Waters Till then, 
although, like all the rest of the boys in the town, I’d gone out looking for girls 
and occasionally managed to connect up with this girl or that and ‘walk out’ a 
few Sunday afternoons, I’d never really had a girl of my own It’s a queer 
business, that chasing of girls when you’re about sixteen At some recognized 
part of the town the boys stroll up and down in pairs, watching the girls, and 
the girls stroll up and down m pairs, pretending not to notice the boys, and 
presently some kind of contact is established and instead of twos they’re 
trailing along in fours, all four utterly speechless The chief feature of those 
walks-and it was worse the second time, when you went out with the girl 
alone-was the ghastly failure to make any kind of conversation But Elsie 
Waters seemed different The truth was that I was growing up 
I don’t want to tell the story of myself and Elsie Waters, even if there was 
any story to tell It’s merely that she’s part of the picture, part of ‘before the 
war’ Before the war it was always summer-a delusion, as I’ve remarked 
before, but that’s how I remember it The white dusty road stretching out 
between the chestnut trees, the smell of night-stocks, the green pools under the 
willows, the splash of Burford Weir-that’s what I see when I shut my eyes and 
think of ‘before the war’, and towards the end Elsie Waters is part of it 
I don’t know whether Elsie would be considered pretty now She was then 
She was tall for a girl, about as tall as I am, with pale gold, heavy kind of hair 
which she wore somehow plaited and coiled round her head, and a delicate, 
curiously gentle face She was one of those girls that always look their best m 
black, especially the very plain black dresses they made them wear in the 
drapery- she worked at Lilywhite’s, the drapers, though she came originally 
from London I suppose she would have been two years older than I was 
I’m grateful to Elsie, because she was the first person who taught me to care 
about a woman I don’t mean women in general, I mean an individual woman 
I’d met her at the Reading Circle and hardly noticed her, and then one day I 
went into Lilywhite’s during working hours, a thing I wouldn’t normally have 
been able to do, but as it happened we’d run out of butter muslin and old 
Grimmett sent me to buy some You know the atmosphere of a draper’s shop 
It’s something peculiarly feminine. There’s a hushed feeling, a subdued light, 
a cool smell of cloth, and a faint whirring from the wooden balls of change 
rolling to and fro Elsie was leaning against the counter, cutting off a length of 
doth with the big scissors There was something about her black dress and the 



Coming up for Air 491 

curve of her breast against the counter-I can’t describe it, something curiously 
soft, curiously femimne As soon as you saw her you knew that you could take 
her m your arms and do what you wanted with her She was really deeply 
feminine, very gentle, very submissive, the kind that would always do what a 
man told her, though she wasn’t either small or weak She wasn’t even stupid, 
only rather silent and, at times, dreadfully refined But in those days I was 
rather refined myself 

We were living together for about a year Of course m a town like Lower 
Binfield you could only live together in a figurative sense Officially we were 
‘walking out 5 , which was a recognized custom and not quite the same as being 
engaged There was a road that branched off from the road to Upper Binfield 
and ran along under the edge of the hills There was a long stretch of it, nearly a 
mile, that was quite straight and frmged with enormous horse-chestnut trees, 
and on the grass at the side there was a footpath under the boughs that was 
known as Lovers’ Lane We used to go there on the May evenings, when the 
chestnuts were m blossom Then the short nights came on, and it was light for 
hours after we’d left the shop You know the feeling of a June evening The 
kind of blue twilight that goes on and on, and the air brushing against your face 
like silk Sometimes on Sunday afternoons we went over Chamford Hill and 
down to the water-meadows along the Thames 1913' My God f 1913' The 
stillness, the green water, the rushing of the weir 1 It’ll never come again I 
don’t mean that 1913 will never come again I mean the feelmg inside you, the 
feeling of not being m a hurry and not being frightened, the feelmg you’ve 
either had and don’t need to be told about, or haven’t had and won’t ever have 
the chance to learn 

It wasn’t till late summer that we began what’s called living together I’d 
been too shy and clumsy to begin, and too ignorant to realize that there’d been 
others before me. One Sunday afternoon we went into the beech woods round 
Upper Binfield. Up there you could always be alone I wanted her very badly, 
and I knew quite well that she was only waiting for me to begin Something, I 
don’t know what, put it into my head to go into the grounds of Binfield House 
Old Hodges, who was past seventy and getting very crusty, was capable of 
turning us out, but he’d probably be asleep on a Sunday afternoon We slipped 
through a gap m the fence and down the footpath between the beeches to the 
big pool It was four years or more since I’d been that way Nothing had 
changed Still the utter solitude, the hidden feelmg with the great trees all 
round you, the old boat-house rotting among the bulrushes We lay down in 
the little grass hollow beside the wild peppermint, and we were as much alone 
as if we’d been in Central Africa I’d kissed her God knows how many times, 
and then I’d got up and was wandering about again I wanted her very badly, 
and wanted to take the plunge, only I was half-frightened And curiously 
enough there was another thought m my mmd at the same time It suddenly 
struck me that for years I’d meant to come back here and had never come Now 
I was so near, xtseemed a pity not to go down to the other pool and have a look 
at the big carp I felt I’d kick myself afterwards if I missed the chance, in fact I 
couldn’t think why I hadn’t been back before The carp were stored away in 



492 Coming up for Air 

my mind, nobody knew about them except me, I was going to catch them some 
time Practi call y they were my carp I actually started wandering along the 
bank m that direction, and then when I’d gone about ten yards I turned back 
It meant crashing your way through a kind of jungle of brambles and rotten 
brushwood, and I was dressed up in my Sunday best Dark-grey suit, bowler 
hat, button boots, and a collar that almost cut my ears off That was how people 
dressed for Sunday afternoon walks m those days And I wanted Elsie very 
badly I went back and stood over her for a moment She was lying on the grass 
with her arm over her face, and she didn’t stir when she heard me come In her 
black dress she looked-I don’t know how, kind of soft, kind of yielding, as 
though her body was a kind of malleable stuff that you could do what you liked 
with She was mine and I could have her, this minute if I wanted to Suddenly 
I stopped being frightened, I chucked my hat on to the grass (it bounced, I 
remember), knelt down, and took hold of her I can smell the wild peppermint 
yet It was my first time, but it wasn’t hers, and we didn’t make such a mess of 
it as you might expect So that was that The big carp faded out of my mind 
again, and m fact for years afterwards I hardly thought about them 

1913 1914 The spring of 1914 First the blackthorn, then the hawthorn, 
then the chestnuts in blossom Sunday afternoons along the towpath, and the 
wind rippling the beds of rushes so that they swayed all together m great thick 
masses and looked somehow like a woman’s hair The endless June evenings, 
the path under the chestnut trees, an owl hooting somewhere and Elsie’s body 
against me It was a hot July that year How we sweated in the shop, and how 
the cheese and the ground coffee smelt' And then the cool of the evening 
outside, the smell of night-stocks and pipe-tobacco in the lane behind the 
allotments, the soft dust underfoot, and the nightjars hawking after the 
cockchafers 

Christ' What’s the use of saying that one oughtn’t to be sentimental about 
‘before the war’’ I am sentimental about it So are you if you remember it It’s 
quite true that if you look back on any special period of time you tend to 
remember the pleasant bits That’s true even of the war But it’s also true that 
people then had something that we haven’t got now 

What’ It was simply that they didn’t think of the future as something to be 
terrified of It isn’t that life was softer then than now Actually it was harsher 
People on the whole worked harder, lived less comfortably, and died more 
painfully The farm hands worked frightful hours for fourteen shillings a week 
and ended up as worn-out cripples with a five-shilling old-age pension and an 
occasional half-crown from the parish And what was called ‘respectable’ 
poverty was even worse When little Watson, a small draper at the other end of 
the High Street, ‘failed’ after years of strugglmg, his personal assets were 
£2 9s, 6d., and he died almost immediately of what was called ‘gastric trouble’, 
but the doctor let it out that it was starvation. Yet he’d clung to his frock coat to 
the last. Old Crimp, the watchmaker’s assistant, a skilled workman who’d been 
at the job, man and boy, for fifty years, got cataract and had to go into the 
workhouse. His grandchildren were howling in the street when they took him 
away. His wife went out charing, and by desperate efforts managed to send him 



Coming up for Air 493 

a shilling a week for pocket-money You saw ghastly things happening 
sometimes Small businesses sliding down the hill 3 solid tradesmen tur ning 
gradually into broken-down bankrupts, people dying by inches of cancer and 
liver disease, drunken husbands signing the pledge every Monday and 
breaking it every Saturday, girls ruined for life by an illegitimate baby The 
houses had no bathrooms, you broke the ice in your basm on winter mormngs, 
the back streets stank hke the devil in hot weather, and the churchyard was 
bang in the middle of the town, so that you never went a day without 
remembering how you’d got to end And yet what was it that people had m 
those days? A feeling of security, even when they weren’t secure More exactly, 
it was a feeling of continuity All of them knew they’d got to die, and I suppose 
a few of them knew they were going to go bankrupt, but what they didn’t know 
was that the order of things could change Whatever might happen to 
themselves, things would go on as they’d known them I don’t believe it made 
very much difference that what’s called religious belief was still prevalent in 
those days It’s true that nearly everyone went to church, at any rate m the 
country-Elsie and I still went to church as a matter of course, even when we 
were living m what the vicar would have called sm-and if you asked people 
whether they believed in a life after death they generally answered that they 
did But I’ve never met anyone who gave me the impression of really believing 
in a future life I think that, at most, people believe m that kind of thing m the 
same way as kids believe m Father Christmas But it’s precisely m a settled 
period, a period when civilization seems to stand on its four legs like an 
elephant, that such things as a future life don’t matter It’s easy enough to die if 
the things you care about are going to survive You’ve had your life, you’re 
getting tired, it’s time to go underground-that’s how people used to see it 
Individually they were finished, but their way of life would continue Their 
good and evil would remain good and evil They didn’t feel the ground they 
stood on shifting under their feet 

Father was failing, and he didn’t know it It was merely that times were very 
bad, trade seemed to dwindle and dwindle, his bills were harder and harder to 
meet Thank God, he never even knew that he was ruined, never actually went 
bankrupt, because he died very suddenly (it was influenza that turned into 
pneumonia) at the beginning of 1915 To the end he believed that with thrift, 
hard work, and fair dealing a man can’t go wrong There must have been 
plenty of small shopkeepers who carried that belief not merely on to bankrupt 
deathbeds but even into the workhouse Even Lovegrove the saddler, with cars 
and motor- vans staring him m the face, didn’t realize that he was as out of date 
as the rhinoceros And Mother too-Mother never lived to know that the life 
she’d been brought up to, the life of a decent God-fearing shopkeeper’s 
daughter and a decent God-fearing shopkeeper’s wife m the reign of good 
Queen Vic, was finished for ever. Times were difficult and trade was bad. 
Father was worried and this and that was ‘aggravating’, but you earned on 
much the same as usual The old English order of life couldn’t>change. For 
ever and ever decent God-fearing women would cook Yorkshire pudding and 
apple dumplings on enormous coal ranges, wear woollen underclothes and 



494 Coming up for Air 

sleep on feathers, make plum jam m July and pickles in October, and read 
Hilda’s Home Companion m the afternoons, with the flies buzzing round, in a 
sort of cosy little underworld of stewed tea, bad legs, and happy endings I 
don’t say that either Father or Mother was quite the same to the end They 
were a bit shaken, and sometimes a little dispirited But at least they never 
lived to know that everything they’d believed in was just so much junk They 
lived at the end of an epoch, when everything was dissolving into a sort of 
ghastly flux, and they didn’t know it They thought it was eternity You 
couldn’t blame them That was what it felt like 
Then came the end of July, and even Lower Bmfield grasped that things 
were happening For days there was tremendous vague excitement and endless 
leading articles m the papers, which Father actually brought m from the shop 
to read aloud to Mother And then suddenly the posters everywhere 

GERMAN ULTIMATUM FRANCE 
MOBILIZING 

For several days (four days, wasn’t it^ I forget the exact dates) there was a 
strange stifled feeling, a kind of waiting hush, Like the moment before a 
thunderstorm breaks, as though the whole of England was silent and listening 
It was very hot, I remember In the shop it was as though we couldn’t work, 
though already everyone in the neighbourhood who had five bob to spare was 
rushing in to buy quantities of tinned stuff and flour and oatmeal It was as if 
we were too feverish to work, we only sweated and waited In the evenings 
people went down to the railway station and fought like devils over the evening 
papers which arrived on the London tram And then one afternoon a boy came 
rushing down the High Street with an armful of papers, and people were 
coming into their doorways to shout across the street Everyone was shouting 
‘We’ve come in 1 We’ve come m 1 ’ The boy grabbed a poster from his bundle 
and stuck it on the shop-front opposite 

ENGLAND DECLARES WAR ON 
GERMANY 

We rushed out on to the pavement, all three assistants, and cheered 
Everybody was cheering Yes, cheering But old Grimmett, though he’d 
already done pretty well out of the war-scare, still held on to a little of his 
Liberal principles, ‘didn’t hold’ with the war, and said it would be a bad 
business 

Two months later I was m the Army Seven months later I was in France. 



8 


I wasn’t wounded till late m 1916 

We’d just come out of the trenches and were marching over a bit of road a 
mile or so back which was supposed to be safe, but which the Germans must 
have got the range of some time earlier Suddenly they started putting a few 
shells over-it was heavy H E stuff, and they were only firing about one a 
minute There was the usual zwee-e-e-e 1 and then boom 1 in a field somewhere 
over to the right I think it was the third shell that got me I knew as soon as I 
heard it coming that it had my name written on it They say you always know 
It didn’t say what an ordinary shell says It said ‘I’m after you, you b— , you, 
you b — , YOuJ’-all this in the space of about three seconds And the last you 
was the explosion 

I felt as if an enormous hand made of air were sweeping me along And 
presently I came down with a sort of burst, shattered feeling among a lot of old 
tin cans, splinters of wood, rusty barbed wire, turds, empty cartridge cases, 
and other muck m the ditch at the side of the road When they’d hauled me out 
and cleaned some of the dirt off me they found that I wasn’t very badly hurt It 
was only a lot of small shell-splinters that had lodged in one side of my bottom 
and down the backs of my legs. But luckily I’d broken a rib in falling, which 
made it just bad enough to get me back to England I spent that winter in a 
hospital camp on the downs near Eastbourne 

Do you remember those war-time hospital camps ? The long rows of wooden 
huts like chicken-houses stuck right on top of those beastly icy downs-the 
‘south coast’, people used to call it, which made me wonder what the north 
coast could be like- where the wind seems to blow at you from all directions at 
once And the droves of blokes in their pale-blue flannel suits and red ties, 
wandering up and down looking for a place out of the wind and never finding 
one Sometimes the kids from the slap-up boys’ schools in Eastbourne used to 
be led round in crocodiles to hand out fags and peppermint creams to the 
‘wounded Tommies’, as they called us A pink-faced kid of about eight would 
walk up to a knot of wounded men sitting on the grass, split open a packet of 
Woodbines and solemnly hand one fag to each man, just like feeding the 
monkeys at the zoo Anyone who was strong enough used to wander for miles 
over the downs in hopes of meeting girls There were never enough girls to go 
round In the valley below the camp there was a bit of a spmney, and long 
before dusk you’d see a couple glued against every tree, and sometimes, if it 
happened to be a thick tree, one on each side of it My chief memory of that 



45 )6 Coming up for Air 

time is sitting against a gorse-bush m the freezing wind, with my fingers so 
cold I couldn’t bend them and the taste of a peppermint cream m my mouth 
That’s a typical soldier’s memory But I was getting away from a Tommy’s 
life, all the same The C O had sent my name m for a commission a little 
before I was wounded By this time they were desperate for officers and anyone 
who wasn’t actually illiterate could have a commission if he wanted one I went 
straight from the hospital to an officers’ training camp near Colchester 
It’s very strange, the things the war did to people It was less than three 
years since I’d been a spry young shop-assistant, bending over the counter in 
my white apron with ‘Yes, madam 1 Certainly, madam 1 And the next order, 
madam?’ with a grocer’s life ahead of me and about as much notion of 
becoming an Army officer as of getting a knighthood And he.re I was already, 
swaggering about m a gorblimey hat and a yellow collar and more or less 
keeping my end up among a crowd of other temporary gents and some who 
weren’t even temporary And-this is really the pomt-not feeling it in any way 
strange Nothing seemed strange m those days 
It was like an enormous machine that had got hold of you You’d no sense of 
acting of your own free will, and at the same time no notion of trying to resist 
If people didn’t have some such feeling as that, no war could last three months 
The armies would just pack up and go home Why had I joined the Army? Or 
the million other idiots who joined up before conscription came in? Partly for a 
lark and partly because of England my England and Britons never never and 
all that stuff But how long did that last? Most of the chaps I knew had 
forgotten all about it long before they got as far as France The men m the 
trenches weren’t patriotic, didn’t hate the Kaiser, didn’t care a damn about 
gallant little Belgium and the Germans raping nuns on tables (it was always ‘on 
tables’, as though that made it worse) m the streets of Brussels On the other 
hand it didn’t occur to them to try and escape The machine had got hold of 
you and it could do what it liked with you It lifted you up and dumped you 
down among places and things you’d never dreamed of, and if it had dumped 
you down on the surface of the moon it wouldn’t have seemed particularly 
strange The day I joined the Army the old life was finished It was as though it 
didn’t concern me any longer I wonder if you’d believe that from that day 
forward I only once went back to Lower Binfield, and that was to Mother’s 
funeral? It sounds incredible now, but it seemed natural enough at the time 
Partly, I admit, it was on account of Elsie, whom, of course, I’d stopped 
writing to after two or three months No doubt she’d picked up with someone 
else, but I didn’t want to meet her Otherwise, perhaps, when I got a bit of 
leave I’d have gone down and seen Mother, who’d had fits when I joined the 
Army but would have been proud of a son in uniform 
Father died m 1915 , 1 was m France at the time I don’t exaggerate when I 
say that Father’s death hurts me more now than it did then At the time it was 
just a bit of bad news which I accepted almost without interest, in the sort of 
empty-headed apathetic way in which one accepted every thing m the trenches 
I remember crawling into the doorway of the dugout to get enough light to 
read the letter* and I remember Mother’s tear-stains on the letter, and the 



Coming up for Air 49 j 

aching feeling m my knees and the smell of mud Father’s life-insurance policy 
had been mortgaged for most of its value, but there was a little money m the 
bank and Sarazms’ were going to buy up the stock and even pay some tiny 
amount for the good-will Anyway, Mother had a bit over two hundred 
pounds, besides the furniture She went for the time being to lodge with her 
cousin, the wife of a small-holder who was doing pretty well out of the war, 
near Doxley, a few miles the other side of Walton It was only ‘for the time 
being’ There was a temporary feeling about everything In the old days, 
which as a matter of fact were barely a year old, the whole thing would have 
been an appalling disaster With Father dead, the shop sold and Mother with 
two hundred pounds in the world, you’d have seen stretching out in front of 
you a kind of fifteen-act tragedy, the last act being a pauper’s funeral But now 
the war and the feeling of not being one’s own master overshadowed 
everything People hardly thought m terms of things like bankruptcy and the 
workhouse any longer This was the case even with Mother, who, God knows, 
had only very dim notions about the war Besides, she was already dying, 
though neither of us knew it. 

She came across to see me in the hospital at Eastbourne It was over two 
years since I’d seen her, and her appearance gave me a bit of a shock. She 
seemed to have faded and somehow to have shrunken Partly it was because by 
this time I was grown-up, I’d travelled, and everything looked smaller to me, 
but there was no question that she’d got thinner, and also yellower She talked 
in the old rambling way about Aunt Martha (that was the cousin she was 
staying with), and the changes m Lower Bmfield since the war, and all the boys 
who’d ‘gone’ (meaning joined the Army), and her indigestion which was 
‘aggravating’, and poor Father’s tombstone and what a lovely corpse he made 
It was the old talk, the talk I’d listened to for years, and yet somehow it was like 
a ghost talking It didn’t concern me any longer I’d known her as a great 
splendid protecting kind of creature, a bit like a ship’s figure-head and a bit like 
a broody hen, and after all she was only a little old woman in a black dress 
Everything was changing and fading That was the last time I saw her alive I 
got the wire saying she was seriously ill when I was at the training school at 
Colchester, and put m for a week’s urgent leave immediately But it was too 
late She was dead by the time I got to Doxley What she and everyone else had 
imagined to be indigestion was some kind of internal growth, and a sudden 
chill on the stomach put the final touch The doctor tried to cheer me up by 
telling me that the growth was ‘benevolent’, which struck me as a queer thing 
to call it, seeing that it had killed her. 

Well, we buried her next to Father, and that was my last glimpse of Lower 
Binfield It had changed a lot, even in three years Some of the shops were shut, 
some had different names over them Nearly all the men I’d known as boys 
were gone, and some of them were dead. Sid Lovegrove was dead, killed on the 
Somme Ginger Watson, the farm lad who’d belonged to the Black Hand years 
ago, the one who used to catch rabbits alive, was dead in Egypt One of the 
chaps who’d worked with me at Grimmett’s had lost both legs Old Lovegrove 
had shut up his shop and was living in 4 cottage near Walton on a tmy annuity. 



4 98 Coming up for Air 

Old Grimmett, on the other hand, was doing well out of the war and had 
turned patriotic and was a member of the local board which tried con- 
scientious objectors The thing which more than anything else gave the town 
an empty, forlorn kind of look was that there were practically no horses left 
Every horse worth taking had been commandeered long ago The station fly 
still existed, but the brute that pulled it wouldn’t have been able to stand up if 
it hadn’t been for the shafts For the hour or so that I was there before the 
funeral I wandered round the town, saying how d’you do to people and 
showing off my uniform Luckily I didn’t run into Elsie I saw all the changes, 
and yet it was as though I didn’t see them My mmd was on other things, 
chiefly the pleasure of being seen m my second-loot’s umform, with my black 
armlet (a thing which looks rather smart on khaki) and my new whipcord 
breeches I distinctly remember that I was still thinking about those whipcord 
breeches when we stood at the graveside And then they chucked some earth 
on to the coffin and I suddenly realized what it means for your mother to be 
lying with seven feet of earth on top of her, and something kind of twitched 
behind my eyes and nose, but even then the whipcord breeches weren’t 
altogether out of my mind 

Don’t think I didn’t feel for Mother’s death I did I wasn’t m the trenches 
any longer, I could feel sorry for a death But the thing I didn’t care a damn 
about, didn’t even grasp to be happening, was the passing-away of the old life 
I’d known After the funeral. Aunt Martha, who was rather proud of having a 
‘real officer’ for a nephew and would have made a splash of the funeral if I’d let 
her, went back to Doxley on the bus and I took the fly down to the station, to 
get the tram to London and then to Colchester We drove past the shop No 
one had taken it since Father died. It was shut up and the window-pane was 
black with dust, and they’d burned the ‘S Bowling’ off the signboard with a 
plumber’s blowflame Well, ther x e was the house where I’d been a child and a 
boy and a young man, where I’d crawled about the kitchen floor and smelt the 
sainfoin and read ‘Donovan the Dauntless’, where I’d done my homework for 
the Grammar School, mixed bread paste, mended bicycle punctures, and tried 
on my first high collar It had been as permanent to me as the Pyramids, and 
now it would be just an accident if I ever set foot in it again Father, Mother, 
Joe, the errand boys, old Nailer the terrier, Spot, the one that came after 
Nailer, Jackie the bullfinch, the cats, the mice m the loft-all gone, nothing left 
but dust And I didn’t care a damn I was sorry Mother was dead, I was even 
sorry Father was dead, but all the time my mmd was on other things I was a 
bit proud of being seen riding in a cab, a thing I hadn’t yet got used to, and I 
was thinking of the sit of my new whipcord breeches, and my nice smooth 
officer’s putties, so different from the gritty stuff the Tommies had to wear, 
and of the other chaps at Colchester and the sixty quid Mother had left and the 
beanos we’d have with it. Also I was thanking God that I hadn’t happened to 
run into Elsie 

The war did extraordinary things to people And what was more 
extraordinary than the way it killed people was the way it sometimes didn’t kill 
them It was like a great flood rushing you along to death, and suddenly it 



Coming up for Air 499 

would shoot you up some backwater where you’d find yourself doing 
incredible and pointless things and drawing extra pay for them There were 
labour battalions making roads across the desert that didn’t lead anywhere, 
there were chaps marooned on oceanic islands to look out for German cruisers 
which had been sunk years earlier, there were Ministries of this and that with 
armies of clerks and typists which went on existing years after their function 
had ended, by a kind of inertia People were shoved into meaningless jobs and 
then forgotten by the authorities for years on end This was what happened to 
myself, or very likely I wouldn’t be here The whole sequence of events is 
rather interesting 

A little while after I was gazetted there was a call for officers of the A S C As 
soon as the O C of the training camp heard that I knew something about the 
grocery trade (I didn’t let on that I’d actually been behind the counter) he told 
me to send my name m That went through all right, and I was just about to 
leave for another trammg-school for A S C officers somewhere m the 
Midlands when there was a demand for a young officer, with knowledge of the 
grocery trade, to act as some kind of secretary to Sir Joseph Cheam, who was a 
big noise in the A S C God knows why they picked me out, but at any rate 
they did so I’ve since thought that they probably mixed my name up with 
somebody else’s Three days later I was saluting in Sir Joseph’s office He was 
a lean, upright, rather handsome old boy with grizzled hair and a grave- 
looking nose which immediately impressed me He looked the perfect 
professional soldier, the K C M G , D S O with bar type, and might have 
been twin brother to the chap in the De Reszke advert, though in private life he 
was chairman of one of the big chain groceries and famous all over the world 
for something called the Cheam Wage-Cut System He stopped writing as I 
came in and looked me over 

‘You a gentleman’’ 

‘No, sir ’ 

‘Good Then perhaps we’ll get some work done ’ 

In about three minutes he’d wormed out of me that I had no secretarial 
experience, didn’t know shorthand, couldn’t use a typewriter, and had worked 
m a grocery at twenty-eight shillings a week However, he said that I’d do, 
there were too many gentlemen in this damned Army and he’d been looking 
for somebody who could count beyond ten. I liked him and looked forward to 
working for him, but just at this moment the mysterious powers that seemed to 
be running the war drove us apart again Something called the West Coast 
Defence Force was being formed, or rather was being talked about, and there 
was some vague idea of establishing dumps of rations and other stores at 
various points along the coast Sir Joseph was supposed to be responsible for 
the dumps in the south-west corner of England. The day after I joined his 
office he sent me down to check over the stores at a place called Twelve Mile 
Dump, on the North Cornish Coast Or rather my job was to find out whether 
any stores existed. Nobody seemed certain about this I’d just got there and 
discovered that the stores comisted of eleven tins of bully beef when a wire 
arrived from the War Office telling sne to take charge of the stores at Twelve 



j-oo Coming up for Air 

Mile Dump and remain there till further notice I wired back ‘No stores at 
Twelve Mile Dump * Too late Next day came the official letter informing me 
that I was O C Twelve Mile Dump And that’s really the end of the story I 
remained O C Twelve Mile Dump for the rest of the war 

God knows what it was all about It’s no use asking me what the West Coast 
Defence Force was or what it was supposed to do Even at that time nobody 
pretended to know In any case it didn’t exist It was just a scheme that had 
floated through somebody’s mind-followmg on some vague rumour of a 
German invasion via Ireland, I suppose-jand the food dumps which were 
supposed to exist all along the coast were also imaginary The whole thing had 
existed for about three days, like a sort of bubble, and then had been forgotten, 
and I’d been forgotten with it My eleven tins of bully beef had been left 
behind by some officers who had been there earlier on some other mysterious 
mission They’d also left behind a very deaf old man called Private Lidgebird 
What Lidgebird was supposed to be doing there I never discovered I wonder 
whether you’ll believe that I remained guarding those eleven tins of bully beef 
from half-way through 1 9 1 7 to the beginning of 1 9 1 9? Probably you won’t, but 
it’s the truth And at the time even that didn’t seem particularly strange By 
1918 one had simply got out of the habit of expecting things to happen m a 
reasonable manner 

Once a month they sent me an enormous official form calling upon me to 
state the number and condition of pick-axes, entrenching tools, coils of barbed 
wire, blankets, waterproof groundsheets, first-aid outfits, sheets of corrugated 
iron, and tins of plum and apple jam under my care I just entered ‘ml’ against 
everything and sent the form back Nothing ever happened Up m London 
someone was quietly filing the forms, and sending out more forms, and filing 
those, and so on It was the way things were happening The mysterious 
higher-ups who were running the war had forgotten my existence I didn’t jog 
their memory I was up a backwater that didn’t lead anywhere, and after two 
years in France I wasn’t so burning with patriotism that I wanted to get out of 

it 

It was a lonely part of the coast where you never saw a soul except a few 
yokels who’d barely heard there was a war on A quarter of a mile away, down a 
little hill, the sea boomed and surged over enormous flats of sand Nine months 
of the year it rained, and the other three a raging wind blew off the Atlantic 
There was nothing there except Private Lidgebird, myself, two Army 
huts-one of them a decentish two-roomed hut which I mhabited-and the 
eleven tins of bully beef. Lidgebird was a surly old devil and I could never get 
much out of him except the fact that he’d been a market gardener before he 
joined the Army It was interesting to see how rapidly he was reverting to type 
Even before I got to Twelve Mile Dump he’d dug a patch round one of the 
huts and started planting spuds, m the autumn he dug another patch till he’d 
got about half an acre under cultivation, at the beginning of 1918 he started 
kespng hens which had got to quite a number by the end of the summer, and 
towards* the end of the year he suddenly produced a pig from God knows 
where. I don’t thmk it crossed his mind to wonder what the devil we were 



Coming up for Air 50/ 

doing there, or what the West Coast Defence Force was and whether it actually 
existed It wouldn’t surprise me to hear that he’s there still, raising pigs and 
potatoes on the spot where Twelve Mile Dump used to be I hope he is Good 
luck to him 

Meanwhile I was doing something I’d never before had the chance to do as a 
full-time job -reading 

The officers who’d been there before had left a few books behind, mostly 
sevenpenny editions and nearly all of them the kind of tripe that people were 
reading m those days Ian Hay and Sapper and the Craig Kennedy stories and 
so forth But at some time or other somebody had been there who knew what 
books are worth reading and what are not I myself, at the time, didn’t know 
anything of the kind The only books I’d ever voluntarily read were detective 
stories and once m a way a smutty sex book God knows I don’t set up to be a 
highbrow even now, but if you’d asked me then for the name of a 'good’ book 
I’d have answered The Woman Thou Gavest Me, or (in memory of the vicar) 
Sesame and Lilies In any case a ‘good’ book was a book one didn’t have any 
intention of reading But there I was, m a j ob where there was less than nothing 
to do, with the sea booming on the beach and the ram streaming down the 
wmdow-panes-and a whole row of books staring me m the face on the 
temporary shelf someone had rigged up against the wall of the hut Naturally I 
started to read them from end to end, with, at the beginning, about as much 
attempt to discriminate as a pig working its way through a pail of garbage 

But in among them there were three or four books that were different from 
the others No, you’ve got it wrong' Don’t run away with the idea that I 
suddenly discovered Marcel Proust or Henry James or somebody I wouldn’t 
have read them even if I had These books I’m speaking of weren’t in the least 
highbrow But now and again it so happens that you strike a book which is 
exactly at the mental level you’ve reached at the moment, so much so that it 
seems to have been written especially for you One of them was H G Wells’s 
The History of Mr Polly , in a cheap shilling edition which was falling to pieces 
I wonder if you can imagine the effect it had upon me, to be brought up as I’d 
been brought up, the son of a shopkeeper m a country town, and then to come 
across a book like that’ Another was Compton Mackenzie’s Sinister Street It 
had been the scandal of the season a few years back, and I’d even heard vague 
rumours of it in Lower Bmfield Another was Conrad’s Victory , parts of which 
bored me But books like that started you thinking And there was a back 
number of some magazine with a blue cover which had a short story of 
D H Lawrence’s m it I don’t remember the name of it It was a story about a 
German conscript who shoves his sergeant-major over the edge of a 
fortification and then does a bunk and gets caught m his girl’s bedroom. It 
puzzled me a lot I couldn’t make out what it was all about, and yet it left me 
with a vague feeling that I’d like to read some others like it. 

Well, for several months I had an appetite for books that was almost like 
physical thirst. It was the first real go-in at reading that I’d had since my Dick 
Donovan days At the beginning I had no idea how to set about getting hold of 
books I thought the only way was to buy them That’s interesting, I think It 



50 2 Coming up for Air 

shows you the difference upbringing makes I suppose the children of the 
middle classes, the £500 a year middle classes, know all about Mudie’s and the 
Times Book Club when they’re in their cradles A bit later I learned of the 
existence of lending libraries and took out a subscription at Mudie’s and 
another at a library in Bristol And what I read during the next year or so' 
Wells, Conrad, Kipling, Galsworthy, Barry Pain, W W Jacobs, Pett Ridge, 
Oliver Onions, Compton Mackenzie, H Seton Merriman, Maurice Baring, 
Stephen McKenna, May Sinclair, Arnold Bennett, Anthony Hope, Elinor 
Glyn, O Henry, Stephen Leacock, and even Silas Hocking and Jean Stratton 
Porter How many of the names m that list are known to you, I wonder^ Half 
the books that people took seriously in those days are forgotten now But at the 
beginning I swallowed them all down like a whale that’s got m among a shoal of 
shrimps I just revelled in them After a bit, of course, I grew more highbrow 
and began to distinguish between tripe and not- tripe I got hold of Lawrence’s 
Sons and Lovers and sort of half-enjoyed it, and I got a lot of kick out of Oscar 
Wilde’s Dorian Gray and Stevenson’s New Arabian Nights Wells was the 
author who made the biggest impression on me I read George Moore’s Esther 
Waters and liked it, and I tried several of Hardy’s novels and always got stuck 
about half-way through I even had a go at Ibsen, who left me with a vague 
impression that in Norway it’s always raining 

It was queer, really Even at the time it struck me as queer I was a second- 
loot with hardly any Cockney accent left, I could already distinguish between 
Arnold Bennett and Elinor Glyn, and yet it was only four years since I’d been 
slicing cheese behind the counter m my white apron and looking forward to the 
days when I’d be a master-grocer If I tot up the account, I suppose I must 
admit that the war did me good as well as harm At any rate that year of reading 
novels was the only real education, in the sense of book-learning, that I’ve ever 
had It did certain things to my mind It gave me an attitude, a kind of 
questionmg attitude, which I probably wouldn’t have had if I’d gone through 
life m a normal sensible way But - 1 wonder if you can understand this-the 
thing that really changed me, really made an impression on me, wasn’t so much 
the books I read as the rotten meaninglessness of the life I was leading 

It really was unspeakably meaningless, that time m 1918. Here I was, sitting 
beside the stove m an Army hut, reading novels, and a few hundred miles away 
m France the guns were roaring and droves of wretched children, wetting their 
bags with fright, were being driven into the machine-gun barrage like you’d 
shoot small coke into a furnace, I was one of the lucky ones The higher-ups 
had taken their eye off me, and here I was in a snug little bolt-hole, drawing 
pay for a job that didn’t exist At times I got into a panic and made sure they’d 
remember about me and dig me out, but it never happened The official forms, 
on gritty grey paper, came in once a month, and I filled them up and sent them 
back, and more forms came in, and I filled them up and sent them back, and so 
it went on. The whole thing had about as much sense m it as a lunatic’s dream 
The effect of all this, plus the books I was reading, was to leave me with a 
Ming of disbelief m everything 

I wasn’t the only one. The war was full of loose ends and forgotten corners. 



Corning up for Air 50 3 

By this time literally millions of people were stuck up backwaters of one kind 
and another Whole armies were rotting away on fronts that people had 
forgotten the names of There were huge Ministries with hordes of clerks and 
typists all drawing two pounds a week and upwards for piling up mounds of 
paper Moreover they knew perfectly well that all they were doing was to pile 
up mounds of paper Nobody believed the atrocity stories and the gallant little 
Belgium stuff any longer The soldiers thought the Germans were good 
fellows and hated the French like poison Every junior officer looked on the 
General Staff as mental defectives A sort of wave of disbelief was moving 
across England, and it even got as far as Twelve Mile Dump It would be an 
exaggeration to say that the war turned people into highbrows, but it did turn 
them into nihilists for the time being People who m a normal way would have 
gone through life with about as much tendency to think for themselves as a 
suet pudding were turned into Bolshies just by the war What should I be now 
if it hadn’t been for the war’ I don’t know, but something different from what I 
am If the war didn’t happen to kill you it was bound to start you thinking 
After that unspeakable idiotic mess you couldn’t go on regarding society as 
something eternal and unquestionable, like a pyramid You knew it was just a 
balls-up 


9 


The war had jerked me out of the old life I’d known, but m the queer period 
that came afterwards I forgot it almost completely 
I know that in a sense one never forgets anything You remember that piece 
of orange-peel you saw m the gutter thirteen years ago, and that coloured 
poster of Torquay that you once got a glimpse of in a railway waiting-room 
But I’m speaking of a different kind of memory In a sense I remembered the 
old life m Lower Bmfield I remembered my fishing-rod and the smell of 
sainfoin and Mother behmd the brown teapot and Jackie the bullfinch and the 
horse-trough in the market-place But none of it was alive m my mmd any 
longer It was something far away, something that I’d finished with It would 
never have occurred to me that some day I might want to go back to it 
It was a queer time, those years just after the war, almost queerer than the 
war itself, though people don’t remember it so vividly In a rather different 
form the sense of disbelieving m everything was stronger than ever Millions of 
men had suddenly been kicked out of the Army to find that the country they’d 
fought for didn’t want them, and Lloyd George and his pals were giving the 
works to any illusions that still existed Bands of ex-service men marched up 
and down rattling collection boxes, masked women were singing in the streets, 
and chaps in officers’ tunics were grinding barrel-organs Everybody in 



504 Coming up for Air 

England seemed to be scrambling for jobs, myself included But I came off 
luckier than most I got a small wound-gratuity, and what with that and the bit 
of money I’d put aside during the last year of war (not having had much 
opportunity to spend it), I came out of the Army with no less than three 
hundred and fifty quid It’s rather interesting, I think, to notice my reaction 
Here I was, with quite enough money to do the thing I s d been brought up to do 
and the thing Fd dreamed of for years-that is, start a shop I had plenty of 
capital If you bide your time and keep your eyes open you can run across quite 
nice little businesses for three hundred and fifty quid And yet, if you’ll believe 
me, the idea never occurred to me I not only didn’t make any move towards 
starting a shop, but it wasn’t till years later, about 1925 in fact, that it even 
crossed my mind that I might have done so The fact was that I’d passed right 
out of the shopkeeping orbit That was what the Army did to you It turned 
you into an imitation gentleman and gave you a fixed idea that there’ d always 
be a bit of money coming from somewhere If you’d suggested to me then, m 
1919, that I ought to start a shop-a tobacco and sweet shop, say, or a general 
store m some god-forsaken village-I’d just have laughed I’d worn pips on my 
shoulder, and my social standards had risen At the same time I didn’t share 
the delusion, which was pretty common among ex-officers, that I could spend 
the rest of my life drinking pink gin I knew I’d got to have a job And the job, 
of course, would be ‘m business’ -just what kind of job I didn’t know, but 
something high-up and important, something with a car and a telephone and if 
possible a secretary with a permanent wave During the last year or so of war a 
lot of us had had visions like that The chap who’d been a shop walker saw 
himself as a travelling salesman, and the chap who’d been a travelling salesman 
saw himself as a managing director It was the effect of Army life, the effect of 
wearing pips and having a cheque-book and calling the evening meal dinner 
All the while there’d been an idea floating round-and this applied to the men 
in the ranks as well as the officers -that when we came out of the Army there’d 
be jobs waiting for us that would bring m at least as much as our Army pay Of 
course, if ideas like that didn’t circulate, no war would ever be fought 

Well, I didn’t get that job It seemed that nobody was anxious to pay me 
£2,000 a year for sitting among streamlined office furrpnare and dictatmg 
letters to a platinum blonde I was discovering what three-quarters of the 
blokes who’d been officers were discovermg-that from a financial point of 
view we’d been better off in the Army than we were ever |jkely to b|#gain 
We’d suddenly changed from gentlemen holding His Majesty’s commission 
into miserable out-of-works whom nobody wanted My ideas soon sank from 
two thousand a year to three or four pounds a week. But even jobs of the three 
or four pounds a week kind didn’t seem to exist Every mortal job was filled 
already, either by men who’d been a few years too old to fight, or by boys 
who’d been a few months too young The poor bastards who’d happened to be 
bom between 1890 and 1900 were left out in the cold And still it never 
occurred to me to go back to the grocermg business Probably I could have got 
- a job as agrocer’s assistant; old Grimmett, if he was still alive and m business (I 
wasn’t in touch with Lower Bmfield and didn’t know), would have given me 



Coming up for Air 505 

good refs But I’d passed into a different orbit Even if my social ideas hadn’t 
risen, I could hardly have imagined, after what I’d seen and learned, going 
back to the old safe existence behind the counter I wanted to be travelling 
about and pulling down the big dough Chiefly I wanted to be a travelling 
salesman, which I knew would suit me 

But there were no jobs for travelling salesmen-that’s to say, jobs with a 
salary attached What there were, however, were on-commission jobs That 
racket was just beginning on a big scale It’s a beautifully simple method of 
increasing your sales and advertising your stuff without taking any risks, and it 
always flourishes when times are bad They keep you on a string by hinting 
that perhaps there’ll be a salaried job going in three months’ time, and when 
you get fed up there’s always some other poor devil ready to take over 
Naturally it wasn’t long before I had an on-commission job, m fact I had quite 
a number in rapid succession Thank God, I never came down to peddling 
vacuum-cleaners, or dictionaries But I travelled m cutlery, in soap-powder, in 
a line of patent corkscrews, tm-openers, and similar gadgets, and finally in a 
line of office accessories-paper-clips, carbon paper, typewriter ribbons, and so 
forth I didn’t do so badly either I’m the type that can sell things on 
commission I’ve got the temperament and I’ve got the manner But I never 
came anywhere near making a decent living You can’t, in jobs like that-and, 
of course, you aren’t meant to 

I had about a year of it altogether It was a queer time The cross-country 
journeys, the godless places you fetched up m, suburbs of Midland towns that 
you’d never hear of in a hundred normal lifetimes The ghastly bed-and- 
breakfast houses where the sheets always smell faintly of slops and the fried 
egg at breakfast has a yolk paler than a lemon And the other poor devils of 
salesmen that you’re always meeting, middle-aged fathers of families m moth- 
eaten overcoats and bowler hats, who honestly believe that sooner or later 
trade will turn the corner and they’ll jack their earnings up to five quid a week. 
And the traipsing from shop to shop, and the arguments with shopkeepers who 
don’t want to listen, and the standing back and making yourself small when a 
customer comes in Don’t think that it worried me particularly To some chaps 
that kind of life is torture There are chaps who can’t even walk into a shop and 
open their bag of samples without screwing themselves up as though they were 
going over the top But I’m not like that I’m tough, I can talk people into 
buying things they don’t want, and even if they slam the door m my face it 
doesn’t bother me Selling things on commission is actually what I like doing, 
provided I can see my way to making a bit of dough out of it I don’t know 
whether I learned much in that year, but I unlearned a good deal It knocked 
the Army nonsense out of me, and it drove into the back of my head the notions 
that I’d picked up during the idle year when I was reading novels I don’t think 
I read a single book, barring detective stories, all the time I was on the road, I 
wasn’t a highbrow any longer, I waa down among the realities of modem life. 
And what are the realities of modern Well, the chief one is an everlasting, 

frantic struggle to sell things? With most people it takes the form of selling 
themselves-that’s to say's getting a job and keeping it r suppose there hasn’t 



506 Coming up for Air 

been a single month since the war, in any trade you care to name, in which 
there weren’t more men than jobs It’s brought a peculiar, ghastly feeling into 
life It’s like on a sinking ship when there are nineteen survivors and fourteen 
lifebelts But is there anything particularly modern in that, you say? Has it 
anything to do with the war? Well, it feels as if it had That feeling that you’ve 
got to be everlastingly fighting and hustling, that you’ll never get anything 
unless you grab it from somebody else, that there’s always somebody after 
your job, the next month or the month after they’ll be reducing staff and 
it’s you that’ll get the bird -that, I swear, didn’t exist in the old life before the 
war 

But meanwhile I wasn’t badly off I was earning a bit and I’d still got plenty 
of money in the bank, nearly two hundred quid, and I wasn’t frightened for the 
future I knew that sooner or later I’d get a regular job And sure enough, after 
about a year, by a stroke of luck it happened I say by a stroke of luck, but the 
fact is that I was bound to fall on my feet I’m not the type that starves I’m 
about as likely to end up m the workhouse as to end dp in the House of Lords 
I’m the middling type, the type that gravitates by a kind of natural law towards 
the five-pound-a-week level So long as there are any jobs at all I’ll back myself 
to get one 

It happened when I was peddling paper-clips and typewriter ribbons I’d 
just dodged into a huge block of offices in Fleet Street, a building which 
canvassers weren’t allowed into, as a matter of fact, but I’d managed to give the 
lift attendant the impression that my bag of samples was merely an attache 
case I was walking along one of the corridors looking for the offices of a small 
toothpaste firm that I’d been recommended to try, when I saw that some very 
big bug was coming down the corridor m the other direction I knew 
immediately that it was a big bug You know how it is with these big business 
men, they seem to take up more room and walk more loudly than any ordinary 
person, and they give off a kind of wave of money that you can feel fifty yards 
away When he got nearly up to me I saw that it was Sir Joseph Cheam. He was 
m civvies, of course, but I had no difficulty m recognizing him I suppose he’d 
been there for some business conference or other A couple of clerks, or 
secretaries, or something, were following after him, not actually holding up his 
tram, because he wasn’t wearing one, but you somehowfiMt that that was what 
they were doing. Of course I dodged aside instantly But curiously enough he 
recognized me, though he hadn’t seen me for years To my surprise he stopped 
and spoke to me 

‘Hullo, you* I’ve seen you somewhere before What’s your name? It’s on the 
tip of my tongue ’ 

‘Bowling, sir Used to be m the A S.C.’ 

‘Of course The boy that said he wasn’t a gentleman What are you doing 
here?’ 

X might have told him I was selling typewriter ribbons, and there perhaps 
the whole thing would have ended But I had one of those sudden inspirations 
that you get occasionally- a feeling that I might make something out of this if I 
handled it properly, I said instead 



Coming up for Air 507 

‘Well, sir, as a matter of fact I’m looking for a job 5 
‘A job, eh'' Hm Not so easy, nowadays 5 

He looked me up and down for a second The two train-bearers had kind of 
wafted themselves a little distance away I saw his rather good-lookmg old 
face, with the heavy grey eyebrows and the intelligent nose, looking me over 
and realized that he’d decided to help me It’s queer, the power of these rich 
men He’d been marching past me in his power and glory, with his underlings 
after him, and then on some whim or other he’d turned aside like an emperor 
suddenly chucking a com to a beggar 
‘So you want a job’ What can you do’’ 

Again the inspiration No use, with a bloke like this, cracking up your own 
merits Stick to the truth I said ‘Nothing, sir But I want a job as a travelling 
salesman ’ 

‘Salesman’ Hm Not sure that I’ve got anything for you at present Let’s 
see ’ 

He pursed his lips up For a moment, half a minute perhaps, he was thinking 
quite deeply It was curious Even at the time I realized that it was curious 
This important old bloke, who was probably worth at least half a million, was 
actually taking thought on my behalf I’d deflected him from his path and 
wasted at least three minutes of his time, all because of a chance remark I’d 
happened to make years earlier. I’d stuck in his memory and therefore he was 
willing to take the tmy bit of trouble that was needed to find me a job I dare say 
the same day he gave twenty clerks the sack Finally he said, 

‘How’d you like to go into an insurance firm’ Always fairly safe, you know 
People have got to have insurance, same as they’ve got to eat ’ 

Of course I jumped at the idea of going into an insurance firm Sir Joseph 
was ‘interested’ in the Flying Salamander God knows how many companies 
he was ‘interested’ in One of the underlings wafted himself forward with a 
scribbling-pad, and there and then, with the gold stylo out of his waistcoat 
pocket. Sir Joseph scribbled me a note to some higher-up m the Flying 
Salamander Then I thanked him, and he marched on, and I sneaked off in the 
other direction, and we never saw one another again 
Well, I got the job, and, as I said earlier, the job got me I’ve been with the 
Flying Salamander close on eighteen years I started off in the office, but now 
I’m what’s known as an Inspector, or, when there’s reason to sound 
particularly impressive, a Representative. A couple of days a week I’m 
working m the district office, and the rest of the time I’m travelling around, 
interviewing clients whose names have been sent m by the local agents, making 
assessments of shops and other property, and now and again snapping up a few 
orders on my own account. I earn round about seven quid a week And 
properly speaking that’s the end of my story. 

When I look bad? I realize that my active life, if I ever had one, ended when I 
was sixteen Everything that really matters to me had happened before thft 
date But in a manner of speaking things were still happening-the war, for 
instance-up to the time when I got the fob with the Flying Salamander. After 
that- well, they say 'that happy people have no histories, and neither do the 



$o8 Coming up for Air 

blokes who work m insurance offices From that day forward there was nothing 
m my life that you could properly describe as an events except that about two 
and a half years later, at the beginning of ’23, 1 got married 


IO 


I was living in a boarding-house m Ealing The years were rolling on, or 
crawling on Lower Bmfield had passed almost out of my memory I was the 
usual young city worker who scoots for the 8 15 and intrigues for the other 
fellow’s job I was fairly well thought of m the firm and pretty satisfied with 
life The post-war success dope had caught me, more or less You remember 
the line of talk Pep, punch, grit, sand Get on or get out There’s plenty of 
room at the top You can’t keep a good man down And the ads m the 
magazines about the chap that the boss clapped on the shoulder, and the keen- 
jawed executive who’s pulling down the big dough and attributes his success to 
so and so’s correspondence course It’s funny how we all swallowed it, even 
blokes like me to whom it hadn’t the smallest application Because I’m neither 
a go-getter nor a down-and-out, and I’m by nature incapable of being either 
But it was the spirit of the time Get on 1 Make good! If you see a man down, 
jump on his guts before he gets up again Of course this was in the early 
twenties, when some of the effects of the war had worn off and the slump 
hadn’t yet arrived to knock the stuffing out of us 

I had an 'A’ subscription at Boots and went to half-crown dances and 
belonged to a local tennis club You know those tennis clubs in the genteel 
suburbs-little wooden pavilions and high wire-netting enclosures where 
young chaps in rather badly cut white flannels prance up and down, shouting 
‘Fifteen forty 1 ’ and ‘Vantage all 1 ’ in voices which are a tolerable imitation of 
the Upper Crust I’d learned to play tennis, didn’t dance too badly, and got on 
well with the girls At nearly thirty I wasn’t a bad-looking chap, with my red 
face and butter-coloured hair, and m those days it was still a point m your 
favour to have fought in the war. I never, then or at any other time, succeeded 
m looking like a gentleman, but on the other hand you probably wouldn’t have 
taken me for the son of a small shopkeeper in a country town I could keep my 
end up in the rather mixed society of a place like Ealing, where the office- 
employee class overlaps with the middling-professional class It was at the 
tennis club that I first met Hilda 

At that time Hilda was twenty-four She was a small, slim, rather timid girl, 
with dark hair, beautiful movements, and-because of having very large eyes-a 
distinct resemblance to a hare She was one of those people who never say 
much,,but remam on the edge of any conversation that’s gomg on, and give the 
impression that they’re listening. If she said anything at all, it was usually ‘Oh, 



Coming up for Air 509 

yes, I think so too’, agreeing with whoever had spoken last At tennis she 
hopped about very gracefully, and didn’t play badly, but somehow had a 
helpless, childish air Her surname was Vincent 

If you’re married, there’ll have been times when you’ve said to yourself 
‘Why the hell did I do it?’ and God knows I’ve said it often enough about 
Hilda And once again, looking at it across fifteen years, why did I marry 
Hilda? 

Partly, of course, because she was young and in a way very pretty Beyond 
that I can only say that because she came of totally different origins from 
myself it was very difficult for me to get any grasp of what she was really like I 
had to marry her first and find out about her afterwards, whereas if I’d married 
say, Elsie Waters, I’d have known what I was marrying Hilda belonged to a 
class I only knew by hearsay, the poverty-stricken officer class For 
generations past her family had been soldiers, sailors, clergymen, Anglo- 
Indian officials, and that kind of thing They’d never had any money, but on 
the other hand none of them had ever done anything that I should recogmze as 
work Say what you will, there’s a kind of snob-appeal in that, if you belong as 
I do to the God-fearing shopkeeper class, the low church, and high-tea class It 
wouldn’t make any impression on me now, but it did then Don’t mistake what 
I’m saymg I don’t mean that I married Hilda because she belonged to the class 
I’d once served across the counter, with some notion of jockeying myself up m 
the social scale It was merely that I couldn’t understand her and therefore was 
capable of being goofy about her And one thing I certainly didn’t grasp was 
that the girls m these penniless middle-class families will marry anything in 
trousers, just to get away from home 

It wasn’t long before Hilda took me home to see her family I hadn’t known 
till then that there was a considerable Anglo-Indian colony in Ealing Talk 
about discovering a new world 1 It was quite a revelation to me 

Do you know these Anglo-Indian families? It’s almost impossible, when you 
get inside these people’s houses, to remember that out m the street it’s England 
and the twentieth century As soon as you set foot inside the front door you’re 
m India m the eighties You know the kind of atmosphere The carved teak 
furniture, the brass trays, the dusty tiger-skulls on the wall, the Tnchmopoly 
cigars, the red-hot pickles, the yellow photographs of chaps in sun-helmets, 
the Hindustani words that you’re expected to know the meaning of, the 
everlasting anecdotes about tiger-shoots and what Smith said to Jones m 
Poona m ’87 It’s a sort of little world of their own that they’ve created, like a 
kind of cyst To me, of course, it was all quite new and in some ways rather 
interesting Old Vincent, Hilda’s father, had been not only m India but also m 
some even more outlandish place, Borneo or Sarawak, I forget which He was 
the usual type, completely bald, almost invisible behind his moustache, and 
full of stones about cobras and cummerbunds and what the distnct collector 
said in ’93 Hilda’s mother was so colourless that she was just like one of the 
faded photos on the wall There was also a son, Harold, who had some official 
job in Ceylon and was home on leave at the time when I first met Hilda They 
had a little dark house in one of those buried back-streets that exist in Ealing. 



j 'io Coming up for Air 

It smelt perpetually of Trichinopoly cigars and it was so full of spears, blow- 
pipes, brass ornaments, and the heads of wild animals that you could hardly 
move about m it 

Old Vincent had retired in 1910, and since then he and his wife had shown 
about as much activity, mental or physical, as a couple of shellfish But at the 
time I was vaguely impressed by a family which had had majors, colonels, and 
once even an admiral in it My attitude towards the Vincents, and theirs 
towards me, is an interesting illustration of what fools people can be when they 
get outside their own line Put me among business people-whether they’re 
company directors or commercial travellers-and I’m a fairly good judge of 
character But I had no experience whatever of the officer-rentier-clergyman 
class, and I was inclined to kow-tow to these decayed throw-outs I looked on 
them as my social and intellectual superiors, while they on the other hand 
mistook me for a rising young businessman who before long would be pulling 
down the big dough To people of that kind, ‘business’, whether it’s marine 
insurance or selling peanuts, is just a dark mystery All they know is that it’s 
something rather vulgar out of which you can make money Old Vincent used 
to talk impressively about my being ‘m busmess’-once, I remember, he had a 
slip of the tongue and said ‘m trade’-and obviously didn’t grasp the difference 
between being in business as an employee and being there on your own 
account He had some vague notion that as I was ‘in’ the Flying Salamander I 
should sooner or later rise to the top of it, by a process of promotion I think it’s 
possible that he also had pictures of himself touching me for fivers at some 
future date Harold certainly had I could see it m his eye In fact, even with my 
income being what it is. I’d probably be lending money to Harold at this 
moment if he were alive Luckily he died a few years after we were married, of 
enteric or something, and both the old Vincents are dead too 

Well, Hilda and I were married, and right from the start it was a flop Why 
did you marry her^ you say But why did you marry yours^ These things 
happen to us I wonder whether you’ll believe that during the first two or three 
years I had serious thoughts of killing Hilda Of course in practice one never 
does these things, they’re only a kind of fantasy that one enjoys thinking about 
Besides, chaps who murder their wives always get copped However cleverly 
you’ve faked the alibi, they know perfectly well that it’s you who did it, and 
they’ll pm it on to you somehow When a woman’s bumped off, her husband is 
always the first suspect -which gives you a little side-glimpse of what people 
really think about marriage 

One gets used to everything m time After a year or two I stopped wanting 
to kill her and started wondering about her Just wondering For hours, 
sometimes, on Sunday afternoons or m the evening when I’ve come home 
from work. I’ve km on my bed with all my clothes on except my shoes, 
wondering about women, Why they’re like that, how they get like that, 
whether they’re doing it on purpose It seems to be a most frightful thing, the 
suddenness with which aome wQmen go to pieces after they’re married. It’s as 
if theyv^ere strung up to do just that one thing, and the instant they’ve done it 
drey tvfther off like a flower that’s set its seed What really gets me down is the 



Coming up for Air 51 j 

dreary attitude towards life that it implies If marriage was just an open 
swmdle-if the woman trapped you into it and then turned round and said, 
'Now, you bastard, I’ve caught you and you’re going to work for me while I 
have a good time’ ’-I wouldn’t mind so much But not a bit of it They don’t 
want to have a good time, they merely want to slump mto middle age as quickly 
as possible After the frightful battle of getting her man to the altar, the woman 
kind of relaxes, and all her youth, looks, energy, and joy of life just vamsh 
overnight It was like that with Hilda Here was this pretty, delicate girl, who’d 
seemed to me-and m fact when I first knew her she was- a finer type of animal 
than myself, and within only about three years she’d settled down into a 
depressed, lifeless, middle-aged frump I’m not denying that I was part of the 
reason But whoever she’d married it would have been much the same 
What Hilda lacks - 1 discovered this about a week after we were married -is 
any kind of joy in life, any kind of interest m things for their own sake The 
idea of doing things because you enjoy them is something she can hardly 
understand It was through Hilda that I first got a notion of what these decayed 
middle-class families are really like The essential fact about them is that all 
their vitality has been drained away by lack of money In families like that, 
which live on tiny pensions and annuities-that’s to say on incomes which 
never get bigger and generally get smaller-there’s more sense of poverty, more 
crust-wipmg, and looking twice at sixpence, than you’d find in any farm- 
labourer’s family, let alone a family like mine Hilda’s often told me that almost 
the first thing she can remember is a ghastly feeling that there was never 
enough money for anything Of course, m that kind of family, the lack of 
money is always at its worst when the kids are at the school-age Consequently 
they grow up, especially the girls, with a fixed idea not only that one always is 
hard-up but that it’s one’s duty to be miserable about it 
At the beginning we lived m a poky little maisonette and had a job to get by 
on my wages Later, when I was transferred to the West Bletchley branch, 
things were better, but Hilda’s attitude didn’t change Always that ghastly 
glooming about money’ The milk bill’ The coal, bill’ The rent’ The school fees’ 
We’ve lived all our life together to the tune of ‘Next week we’ll be in the 
workhouse ’ It’s not that Hilda’s mean, in the ordinary sense of the word, and 
still less that she’s selfish Even when there happens to be a bit of spare cash 
knocking about I can hardly persuade her to buy herself any decent clothes 
But she’s got this feeling that you ought to be perpetually working yourself up 
into a stew about lack of money Just working up an atmosphere of misery from 
a sense of duty I’m not like that I’ve got more the prole’s attitude towards 
money Life’s here to be lived, and if we’re going to be m the soup next 
week- well, next week is a long way off What really shocks her is the fact that I 
refuse to worry She’s always going for me about it ‘But, George’ You don’t 
seem to realize ’ We’ve simply got no money at all’ It’s very serious ’’ She loves 
getting into a panic because something or other is ‘serious 5 And of late she’s 
got that trick, when she’s glooming ’about something,, of kmd of hunching ha: 
shoulders and folding her arms across her breast If you made a list of Hilda’s 
remarks throughout the day, you’d find three bracketed together at the 



5i2 Coming up for Air 

t0 p-‘We can’t afford it’, ‘It’s a great saving’, and ‘I don’t know where the 
money’s to come from’ She does everything for negative reasons When she 
makes a cake she’s not thinking about the cake, only about how to save butter 
and eggs When I’m in bed with her all she thinks about is how not to have a 
baby If she goes to the pictures she’s all the time writhing with indignation 
about the price of the seats Her methods of housekeeping, with all the 
emphasis on ‘using things up’ and ‘making things do’, would have given 
Mother convulsions On the other hand, Hilda isn’t m the least a snob She’s 
never looked down on me because I’m not a gentleman On the contrary, from 
her point of view I’m much too lordly m my habits We never have a meal in a 
tea-shop without a frightful row m whispers because I’m tipping the waitress 
too much And it’s a curious thing that in the last few years she’s become much 
more definitely lower-middle-class, m outlook and even m appearance, than I 
am Of course all this ‘saving’ business has never led to anything It never does 
We live just about as well or as badly as the other people in Ellesmere Road 
But the everlasting stew about the gas bill and the milk bill and the awful price 
of butter and the kids’ boots and school-fees goes on and on It’s a kind of game 
with Hilda 

We moved to West Bletchley in ’29 and started buying the house in 
Ellesmere Road the next year, a little before Billy was born After I was made 
an Inspector I was more away from home and had more opportunities with 
other women Of course I was unfaithful - 1 won’t say all the time, but as often 
as I got the chance Curiously enough, Hilda was jealous In a way, considering 
how little that kind of thing means to her, I wouldn’t have expected her to 
mind And like all jealous women she’ll sometimes show a cunning you 
wouldn’t thmk her capable of Sometimes the way she’s caught me out would 
have made me believe in telepathy, if it wasn’t that she’s often been equally 
suspicious when I didn’t happen to be guilty I’m more or less permanently 
under suspicion, though, God knows, in the last few years-the last five years, 
anyway-I’ve been mnocent enough You have to be, when you’re as fat as I 
am 

Taking it by and large, I suppose Hilda and I don’t get on worse than about 
half the couples in Ellesmere Road There’ve been times when I’ve thought of 
separation or divorce, but m our walk of life you don’t do those things You 
can’t afford to And then time goes on, and you kind of give up struggling 
When you’ve lived with a woman for fifteen years, it’s difficult to imagine life 
without her She’s part of the order of things, I dare say you might find things 
to object to in the sun and the moon, but do you really want to change them? 
Besides, there were the kids Kids are a ‘link’, as they say Or a ‘tie’ Not to say 
a ball and fetter. 

Of late years Hilda has made two great friends called Mrs Wheeler and Miss 
Mrnns Mrs Wheeler is a widow, and I gather she’s got very bitter ideas about 
the male sex, I can feel her kind of quivering with disapproval if I so much as 
come into’ the room. She’s a faded little woman and gives you a curious 
impression that she’s the same colour all over, a kind of greyish dust-colour, 
but she’s full of energy She’s a bad influence on Hilda, because she’s got the 



Coming up for Air 51 3 

same passion for ‘saving’ and ‘making things do’, though m a slightly different 
form With her it takes the form of thinking that you can have a good time 
without paying for it She’s for ever nosing out bargains and amusements that 
don’t cost money With people like that it doesn’t matter a damn whether they 
want a thing or not, it’s merely a question of whether they can get it on the 
cheap When the big shops have their remnant sales Mrs Wheeler’s always at 
the head of the queue, and it’s her greatest pride, after a day’s hard fighting 
round the counter, to come out without having bought anything Miss Minns 
is quite a different sort She’s really a sad case, poor Miss Minns She’s a tall 
thin woman of about thirty-eight, with black patent-leather hair and a very 
good , trusting kind of face She lives on some kind of tiny fixed income, an 
annuity or something, and I fancy she’s a left-over from the old society of West 
Bletchley, when it was a little country town, before the suburb grew up It’s 
written all over her that her father was a clergyman and sat on her pretty 
heavily while he lived They’re a special by-product of the middle classes, 
these women who turn into withered hags before they even manage to escape 
from home Poor old Miss Minns, for all her wrinkles, still looks exactly like a 
child It’s still a tremendous adventure to her not to go to church She’s always 
burbling about ‘modern progress’ and ‘the woman’s movement’, and she’s got 
a vague yearning to do something she calls ‘developing her mind’, only she 
doesn’t quite know how to start I think in the beginning she cottoned on to 
Hilda and Mrs Wheeler out of pure loneliness, but now they take her with 
them wherever they go 

And the times they’ve had together, those three 1 Sometimes I’ve almost 
envied them Mrs Wheeler is the leading spirit You couldn’t name a kind of 
idiocy that she hasn’t dragged them into at one time or another Anything from 
theosophy to cat’s-cradle, provided you can do it on the cheap For months 
they went in for the food-crank business Mrs Wheeler had picked a 
second-hand copy of some book called Radiant Energy which proved that you 
should live on lettuces and other things that don’t cost money Of course this 
appealed to Hilda, who immediately began starving herself She’d have tried it 
on me and the kids as well, only I put my foot down. Then they had a go at 
faith-healing Then they thought of tackling Pelmamsm, but after a lot of 
correspondence they found that they couldn’t get the booklets free, which had 
been Mrs Wheeler’s idea Then it was hay-box cookery Then it was some 
filthy stuff called bee wine, which was supposed to cost nothing at all because 
you made it out of water They dropped that after they’d read an article in the 
paper saying that bee wine gives you cancer Then they nearly joined one of 
those women’s clubs which go for conducted tours round factories, but after a 
lot of arithmetic Mrs Wheeler decided that the free teas the factories gave you 
didn’t quite equal the subscription. Then Mrs Wheeler scraped acquaintance 
with somebody who gave away free tickets for plays produced by some stage 
society or other* I’ve known the three of them sit for hours listening to some 
highbrow play of which they didn’t even pretend to understand a 
word-couldn’t even tell you the name of the play afierwards-hut they felt that 
they were getting something for nothing. Onee they even took up spiritualism. 



Coming up for Air 

Mrs Wheeler had run across some down-and-out medium who was so 
desperate that he’d give sdances for eighteenpence, so that the three of them 
could have a glimpse beyond the veil for a tanner a time I saw him once when 
he came to give a stance at our house He was a seedy-looking old devil and 
obviously in mortal terror of D T s He was so shaky that when he was taking 
his overcoat off in the hall he had a sort of spasm and a hank of butter-muslm 
dropped out of his trouser-leg I managed to shove it back to him before the 
women saw Butter-muslm is what they make the ectoplasm with, so I’m told 
I suppose he was going on to another stance afterwards You don’t get 
manifestations for eighteen pence Mrs Wheeler’s, biggest find of the last few 
years is the Left Book Club I think it was m ’36 that the news of the Left Book 
Club got to West Bletchley. I joined it soon afterwards, and it’s almost the only 
time I can remember spending money without Hilda protesting She can see 
some sense m buying a book when you’re getting it for a third of its proper 
price These women’s attitude is curious, really Miss Minns certainly had a 
try at reading one or two of the books, but this wouldn’t even have occurred to 
the other two They’ve never had any direct connexion with the Left Book 
Club or any notion what it’s all about-m fact I believe at the beginning Mrs 
Wheeler thought it had something to do with books which had been left m 
railway carriages and were being sold off cheap But they do know that it means 
seven and sixpenny books for half a crown, and so they’re always saying that 
it’s ‘such a good idea’ Now and again the local Left Book Club branch holds 
meetings and gets people down to speak, and Mrs Wheeler always takes the 
others along She’s a great one for public meetings of any kind, always 
provided that it’s indoors and admission free The three of them sit there like 
lumps of puddmg They don’t know what the meeting’s about and they don’t 
care, but they’ve got a vague feeling, especially Miss Minns, that they’re 
improving their minds, and it isn’t costing them anything. 

Well, that’s Hilda You see what she’s like Take it by and large, I suppose 
she’s no worse than I am Sometimes when we were first married I felt I’d like 
to strangle her, but later I got so that I didn’t care And then I got fat and 
settled down It must have been in 1 930 that I got fat It happened so suddenly 
that it was as if a cannon ball had hit me and got stuck mside You know how it 
is One night you go to bed, still feeling more or less young, with an eye for the 
girls and so forth, and next mormng you wake up in the full consciousness that 
you’re just a poor old fatty with nothing ahead of you this side the grave except 
sweating your guts out to buy boots for the kids 

And now it’s ’38, and in every shipyard m the world they’re riveting up the 
battleships for another war, and a name I chanced to see on a poster had stirred 
up in me a whole lot of stuff which ought to have been buried God knows how 
many years ago 



PART III 


i 


When I came home that evening I was still in doubt as to what I’d spend my 
seventeen quid on 

Hilda said she was going to the Left Book Club meeting It seemed that 
there was a chap coming down from London to lecture, though needless to say 
Hilda didn’t know what the lecture was going to be about I told her I’d go 
with her In a general way I’m not much of a one for lectures, but the visions of 
war I’d had that morning, starting with the bomber flying over the tram, had 
put me mto a kind of thoughtful mood After the usual argument we got the 
kids to bed early and cleared off m time for the lecture, which was billed for 
eight o’clock 

It was a misty kind of evening, and the hall was cold and not too well lighted 
It’s a little wooden hall with a tm roof, the property of some Nonconformist 
sect or other, and you can hire it for ten bob The usual crowd of fifteen or 
sixteen people had rolled up On the front of the platform there was a yellow 
placard announcing that the lecture was on ‘The Menace of Fascism’ This 
didn’t altogether surprise me Mr Witchett, who acts as chairman of these 
meetings and who m private life is something m an architect’s office, was 
taking the lecturer round, introducing him to everyone as Mr So-and-so (I 
forget his name) ‘the well-known anti-Fascist’, very much as you might call 
somebody ‘the well-known pianist’ The lecturer was a little chap of about 
forty, m a dark suit, with a bald head which he’d tried rather unsuccessfully to 
cover up with wisps of hair 

Meetings of this kmd never start on time There’s always a period of 
hanging about on the pretence that perhaps a few more people are going to 
turn up It was about twenty-five past eight when Witchett tapped on the table 
and did his stuff Witchett’s a mild-lookrag chap, with a pink, baby’s bottom 
kmd of face that’s always covered m smiles. I believe he’s secretary of the local 
Liberal Party, and he’s also on the Parish Council and acts as M.C. at the 
magic lantern lectures for the Mothers’ Union He’s what you might call a 
bom chairman When he tells you how delighted we all are to have Mr So-and- 
so on the platform tonight, you can see that he believes it I never look at him 



5 1 6 Coming up for Air 

without thinking that he’s probably a virgin The little lecturer took out a wad 
of notes, chiefly newspaper cuttings, and pinned them down with his glass of 
water Then he gave a quick lick at his lips and began to shoot 
Do you ever go to lectures, public meetings, and what-not’ 

When I go to one myself, there’s always a moment during the evening when 
I find myself thinking the same thought Why the hell are we doing this’ Why 
is it that people will turn out on a winter night for this kind of thing’ I looked 
round the hall I was sitting m the back row I don’t ever remember going to 
any kind of public meeting when I didn’t sit m the back row if I could manage 
it Hilda and the others had planked themselves in front, as usual It was rather 
a gloomy little hall You know the kind of place Pitch-pme walls, corrugated 
iron roof, and enough draughts to make you want to keep your overcoat on 
The little knot of us were sitting m the light round the platform, with about 
thirty rows of empty chairs behind us And the seats of all the chairs were 
dusty On the platform behind the lecturer there was a huge square thing 
draped m dust-cloths which might have been an enormous coffin under a pall 
Actually it was a piano 

At the beginning I wasn’t exactly listening The lecturer was rather a mean- 
looking little chap, but a good speaker White face, very mobile mouth, and the 
rather grating voice that they get from constant speaking Of course he was 
pitching into Hitler and the Nazis I wasn’t particularly keen to hear what he 
was saying-get the same stuff in the News Chronicle every mornmg-but his 
voice came across to me as a kind of burr-burr-burr, with now and again a 
phrase that struck out and caught my attention 

‘Bestial atrocities. Hideous outbursts of sadism Rubber 

truncheons Concentration camps Iniquitous persecution of the 
Jews Back to the Dark Ages European civilization Act before it is 
too late Indignation of all decent peoples . Alliance of the democratic 
nations Firm stand. . Defence of democracy Democracy 
Fascism . Democracy . Fascism. Democracy ’ 

You know the lme of talk These chaps can chum it out by the hour Just like 
a gramophone. Turn the handle, press the button, and it starts Democracy, 
Fascism, Democracy. But somehow it interested me to watch him A rather 
mean little man, with a white face and a bald head, standing on a platform, 
shooting out slogans What’s he doing’ Quite deliberately, and quite openly, 
he’s stirring up hatred. Doing his damnedest to make you hate certain 
foreigners called Fascists It’s a queer thing, I thought, to be known as ‘Mr So- 
and-so, the well-known anti-Fascist’. A queer trade, anti-Fascism This 
fellow,, I suppose, makes his living by writing books against Hitler. But what 
did he do before Hitler came along? And what what’ll he do if Hitler ever 
disappears’ Same question applies to doctors, detectives, rat-catchers, and so 
forth, of course But the grating voice went on and on, and another thought 
struck me. He means it Not faking at all-feels every word he’s saymg. He’s 
trying to work up hatred in the audience, but that’s nothing to the hatred he 
feels himself. Every slogan’s gospel truth to him. If you cut him open all you’d 
find inside would be Democracy-Fascism-Democracy. Interesting to know a 



Coming up for Air 5/7 

chap like that in private life But does he have a private life? Or does he only go 
round from platform to platform, working up hatred? Perhaps even his dreams 
are slogans 

As well as I could from the back row I had a look at the audience I suppose, 
if you come to think of it, we people who’ll turn out on wmter mghts to sit in 
draughty halls listening to Left Book Club lectures (and I consider that I’m 
entitled to the ‘we’, seeing that I’d done it myself on this occasion) have a 
certain significance We’re the West Bletchley revolutionaries Doesn’t look 
hopeful at first sight It struck me as I looked round the audience that only 
about half a dozen of them had really grasped what the lecturer was talking 
about, though by this time he’d been pitchmg into Hitler and the Nazis for 
over half an hour It’s always like that with meetings of this kind Invariably 
half the people come away without a notion of what it’s all about In his chair 
beside the table Witchett was watching the lecturer with a delighted smile, and 
his face looked a little like a pink geranium You could hear in advance the 
speech he’d make as soon as the lecturer sat down-same speech as he makes at 
the end of the magic lantern lecture m aid of trousers for the Melanesians 
‘Express our thanks-voicing the opinion of all of us-most mterestmg-give us 
all a lot to think about-most stimulating evening*’ In the front row Miss 
Minns was sitting very upright, with her head cocked a little on one side, like a 
bird The lecturer had taken a sheet of paper from under the tumbler and was 
reading out statistics about the German suicide-rate You could see by the look 
of Miss Mmns’s long thin neck that she wasn’t feeling happy Was this 
improving her mind, or wasn’t it? If only she could make out what it was all 
about* The other two were sitting there like lumps of pudding Next to them a 
little woman with red hair was knitting a jumper One plain, two purl, drop 
one, and knit two together The lecturer was describing how the Nazis chop 
people’s heads off for treason and sometimes the executioner makes a bosh 
shot There was one other woman m the audience, a girl with dark hair, one of 
the teachers at the Council School Unlike the other she was really listening, 
sitting forward with her big round eyes fixed on the lecturer and her mouth a 
little bit open, drinking it all m 

Just behind her two old blokes from the local Labour Party were sitting. 
One had grey hair cropped very short, the other had a bald head and a droopy 
moustache Both wearing their overcoats You know the type. Been m the 
Labour Party since the year dot Lives given up to the movement. Twenty 
years of being blacklisted by employers, and another ten of badgering the 
Council to do something about the slums Suddenly everything’s changed, the 
old Labour Party stuff doesn’t matter any longer. Find themselves pitchforked 
into foreign politics-Hitler, Stalin, bombs, machine-guns, rubber trun- 
cheons, Rome-Berlin axis. Popular Front, anti-Comintern pact Can’t make 
head or tail of it Immediately in front of me the local Communist Party branch 
were sitting All three of them very young One of them’s got money and is 
something in the Hesperides Estate Company, in fact I believe he’s old Crum’s 
nephew. Another’s a clerk at one of the banks. He cashes cheques for me 
occasionally A nice boy, with a round, very young, eager face, blue eyes like a 



5 1 8 Coming up for Air 

baby, and hair so fair that you’d think he peroxided it He only looks about 
seventeen, though I suppose he’s twenty He was wearing a cheap blue suit and 
a bright blue tie that went with his hair Next to these three another 
Communist was sitting But this one, it seems, is a different kind of 
Communist and not-quite, because he’s what they call a Trotskyist The 
others have got a down on him He’s even younger, a very thm, very dark, 
nervous-looking boy Clever face Jew, of course These four were taking the 
lecture quite differently from the others You knew they’d be on their feet the 
moment question-time started You could see them kind of twitching already 
And the little Trotskyist working himself from side to side on his bum in his 
anxiety to get m ahead of the others 

I’d stopped listening to the actual words of the lecture But there are more 
ways than one of listening I shut my eyes for a moment The effect of that was 
curious I seemed to see the fellow much better when I could only hear his 
voice 

It was a voice that sounded as if it could go on for a fortnight without 
stopping It’s a ghastly thing, really, to have a sort of human barrel-organ 
shooting propaganda at you by the hour The same thing over and over again 
Hate, hate, hate. Let’s all get together and have a good hate Over and over It 
gives you the feeling that something has got inside your skull and is 
hammering down on your brain But for a moment, with my eyes shut, I 
managed to turn the tables on him. I got inside his skull It was a peculiar 
sensation For about a second I was inside him, you might almost say I was 
him At any rate, I felt what he was feeling 

I saw the vision that he was seeing And it wasn’t at all the kind of vision that 
can be talked about What he’s saying is merely that Hitler’s after us and we 
must all get together and have a good hate Doesn’t go into details Leaves it all 
respectable But what he’s seeing is something quite different It’s a picture of 
himself smashing people’s faces m with a spanner Fascist faces, of course I 
know that’s what he was seeing It was what I saw myself for the second or two 
that I was inside him. Smash! Right in the middle* The bones cave in like an 
eggshell and what was a face a minute ago is just a great big blob of strawberry 
jam Smash* There goes another* That’s what’s in his mind, waking and 
sleeping, and the more he thinks of it the more he likes it And it’s all O K 
because the smashed faces belong to Fascists You could hear all that m the 
tone of his voice 

But why? Likeliest explanation, because he’s scared Every thinking person 
nowadays is stiff with fright This is merely a chap who’s got sufficient 
foresight to be a little more frightened than the others Hitler’s after us* Quick* 
Let’s all grab a spanner and get together, and perhaps if we smash in enough 
faces they won’t smash ours Gang up, choose your Leader Hitler’s black and 
Stalin’s white. But it might just as well be the other way about, because in, the 
little chap’s mind both Hitler and Stalin are the same Both mean spanners and 
smashed faces. 

War! I started thinking about it again. It’s coming soon, that’s certain. But 
who’s afraid of war? That’s to say, who’s afraid of the bombs and the machine- 



Coming up for Air 5 19 

guns? ‘You are’, you say Yes, 1 am, and so’s anybody who’s ever seen them 
But it isn’t the war that matters, it’s the after-war The world we’re going 
down into, the kind of hate-world, slogan-world The coloured shirts, the 
barbed wire, the rubber truncheons The secret cells where the electric light 
burns night and day, and the detectives watching you while you sleep And the 
processions and the posters with enormous faces, and the crowds of a million 
people all cheering for the Leader till they deafen themselves into thinking that 
they really worship him, and all the time, underneath, they hate him so that 
they want to puke It’s all going to happen Or isn’t it? Some days I know it’s 
impossible, other days I know it’s inevitable That mght, at any rate, I knew it 
was going to happen It was all m the sound of the little lecturer’s voice 
So perhaps after all there is a significance m this mingy little crowd that’ll 
turn out on a winter mght to listen to a lecture of this kind Or at any rate m the 
five or six who can grasp what it’s all about They’re simply the outposts of an 
enormous army They’re the long-sighted-ones, the first rats to spot that the 
ship is sinking Quick, quick 1 The Fascists are coming 1 Spanners ready, boys* 
Smash others or they’ll smash you So terrified of the future that we’re 
jumping straight into it like a rabbit divmg down a boa-constrictor’s throat 
And what’ll happen to chaps like me when we get Fascism in England? The 
truth is it probably won’t make the slightest difference As for the lecturer and 
those four Communists m the audience, yes, it’ll make plenty of difference to 
them They’ll be smashing faces, or havipg their own smashed, according to 
who’s winning But the ordinary middling chaps like me will be carrying on 
just as usual And yet it frightens me-I tell you it frightens me I’d just started 
to wonder why when the lecturer stopped and sat down 
There was the usual hollow little sound of clapping that you get when there 
are only about fifteen people in the audience, and then old Witchett said his 
piece, and before you could say Jack Robmson the four Communists were on 
their feet together They had a good dog-fight that went on for about ten 
minutes, full of a lot of stuff that nobody else understood, such as dialectical 
materialism and the destiny of the proletariat and what Lenin said m 1918 
Then the lecturer, who’d had a drink of water, stood up and gave a summing- 
up that made the Trotskyist wriggle about on his chair but pleased the other 
three, and the dog-fight went on unofficially for a bit longer Nobody else did 
any talking Hilda and the others had clear ed off the moment the lecture ended. 
Probably they were afraid there was going to be a collection to pay for the hire 
of the hall The little woman with red hair was staying to finish her row. You 
could hear her counting her stitches in a whisper while the others argued And 
Witchett sat and beamed at whoever happened to be speaking, and you could 
see him thinking how interesting it all was and making mental notes, and the 
girl with black hair looked from one to the other with her mouth a little open, 
and the old Labour man, looking rather like a seal with his droopy moustache 
and his overcoat up to his ears, sat looking up at them, wondering what the hell 
it was all about And finally I got up and began to put on my overcoat. 

The dog-fight had turned into a private row between the little Trotskyist 
and the boy with fair hair * They were arguing about whether you ought to join 



$20 Coming up for A ir 

the Army if war broke out As I edged my way along the row of chairs to get 
out, the fair-haired one appealed to me 

‘Mr Bowling' Look here If war broke out and we had the chance to smash 
Fascism once and for all, wouldn’t you fight> If you were young, I mean ’ 

I suppose he thinks I’m about sixty 

‘You bet I wouldn’t,’ I said ‘I had enough to go on with last time ’ 

‘But to smash Fascism' 5 

‘Oh, b — Fascism' There’s been enough smashing done already, if you ask 
me ’ 

The little Trotskyist chips m with social-patriotism and betrayal of the 
workers, but the others cut him short 

‘But you’re thinking of 1914 That was just an ordinary imperialist war 
This time it’s different Look here When you hear about what’s gomg on m 
Germany, and the concentration camps and the Nazis beating people up with 
rubber truncheons and making the Jews spit m each other’s faces-doesn’t it 
make your blood boiP’ 

They’re always going on about your blood boiling Just the same phrase 
during the war, I remember 

‘ I went off the boil in 1 9 1 6,’ I told him ‘ And so’ll you when you know what a 
trench smells like ’ 

And then all of a sudden I seemed to see him It was as if I hadn’t properly 
seen him till that moment, 

A very young eager face, might have belong to a good-looking schoolboy, 
with blue eyes and tow-coloured hair, gazing into mine, and for a moment 
actually he’d got tears in his eyes' Felt as strongly as all that about the German 
Jews' But as a matter of fact I knew just what he felt He’s a hefty lad, probably 
plays rugger for the bank Got brains, too And here he is, a bank clerk m a 
godless suburb, sitting behind the frosted window, entering figures m a ledger, 
counting piles of notes, bumsucking to the manager. Feels his life rotting 
away And all the while, over m Europe, the big stuff’s happening Shells 
bursting over the trenches and waves of infantry charging through the drifts of 
smoke Probably some of his pals are fighting in Spam. Of course he’s spoiling 
for a war How can you blame him? For a moment I had a peculiar feeling that 
he was my son, which m point of years he might have been. And I thought of 
that sweltering hot day m August when the newsboy stuck up the poster 
England declares war on Germany, and we all rushed out on to the pavement 
in our white aprons and cheered 

‘Listen son,’ I said, ‘you’ve got it all wrong. In 1914 we thought it was going 
to be a glorious business. Well, it wasn’t It was just a bloody mess. If it comes 
again, you keep out of it Why should you get your body plugged full of lead 5 
Keep it for some gud. You think war’s all heroism and VX, charges, but I tell 
you itisn’t like that. You don’t have bayonet-charges nowadays, and when you 
do it isn’t lake you;imagine« You don’t feel like a hero. All you know is that 
you’ve fead-no sleep for three days, and stink like a polecat, you’re pissmg your 
bag&witbftight, and your tods are so cold you can’t hold your rifle But that 
matter a damn, either. It’s the things that happen afterwards,’ 



Coming up for Air 521 

Makes no impression of course They just think you’re out of date Might as 
well stand at the door of a knocking-shop handing out tracts 

The people were beginning to clear off Witchett was taking the lecturer 
home The three Communists and the little Jew went up the road together, and 
they were going at it again with proletarian solidarity and dialectic of the 
dialectic and what Trotsky said in 1917 They’re all the same, really It was a 
damp, still, very black night The lamps seemed to hang m the darkness like 
stars and didn’t light the road In the distance you could hear the trams 
booming along the High Street I wanted a drink, but it was nearly ten and the 
nearest pub was half a mile away Besides, I wanted somebody to talk to, the 
way you can’t talk in a pub It was funny how my brain had been on the go all 
day Partly the result of not working, of course, and partly of the new false 
teeth, which had kind of freshened me up All day I’d been brooding on the 
future and the past I wanted to talk about the bad time that’s either coming or 
isn’t coming, the slogans and the coloured shirts and the streamlined men from 
eastern Europe who are gomg to knock old England cock-eyed Hopeless 
trying to talk to Hilda Suddenly it occurred to me to go and look up old 
Porteous, who’s a pal of mine and keeps late hours 

Porteous is a retired public-school master He lives in rooms, which luckily 
are m the lower half of the house, in the old part of the town, near the church 
He’s a bachelor, of course You can’t imagine that kind married Lives all alone 
with his books and his pipe and has a woman m to do for him He’s a learned 
kind of chap, with his Greek and Latin and poetry and all that I suppose that if 
the local Left Book Club branch represents Progress, old Porteous stands for 
Culture Neither of them cuts much ice m West Bletchley 

The light was burning m the little room where old Porteous sits reading till 
all hours of the mght As I tapped on the front door he came strolling out as 
usual, with his pipe between his teeth and his fingers in a book to keep the 
place He’s rather a striking looking chap, very tall, with curly grey hair and a 
thin, dreamy kind of face that’s a bit discoloured but might almost belong to a 
boy, though he must be nearly sixty It’s funny how some of these public- 
school and university chaps manage to look like boys till their dying day. It’s 
something m their movements Old Porteous has got a way of strolling up and 
down, with that handsome head of his, with the grey curls, held a little back 
that makes you feel that all the whale he’s dreaming about some poem or other 
and isn’t conscious of what’s gomg on round him. You can’t look at him 
without seeing the way he’s lived written all over him Public School, Oxford, 
and then back to his old school as a master. Whole life lived in an atmosphere 
of Latin, Greek, and cricket He’s got all the mannerisms. Always wears an old 
Hams tweed jacket and old grey flannel bags which he likes you to call 
‘disgraceful’, smokes a pipe and looks down on cigarettes, and though he sits 
up half the night I bet he has a cold bath every morning. I suppose from his 
point of view I’m a bit of a bounder. I haven’t been to a public school, I don’t 
know any Latin and don’t even want to. He tells me sometimes that it’s a pity 
I’m ‘insensible to beauty’, which I suppose is a polite way of saying that I’ve 
got no education All the samefhke him He’s very hospitable in the nghtkind 



522 Coming up for Air 

of way, always ready to have you in and talk at all hours, and always got drinks 
handy When you live in a house like ours, more or less infested by women and 
kids, it does you good to get out of it sometimes into a bachelor atmosphere, a 
kind of book-pipe-fire atmosphere And the classy Oxford feeling of nothing 
mattering except books and poetry and Greek statues, and nothing worth 
mentioning having happened since the Goths sacked Rome- sometimes that’s 
a comfort too 

He shoved me into the old leather armchair by the fire and dished out whisky 
and soda I’ve never seen his sittmg-room when it wasn’t dim with pipe- 
smoke. The ceiling is almost black It’s a smallish room and, except for the 
door and the window and the space over the fireplace, the walls are covered 
with books from the floor right up to the ceiling On the mantelpiece there are 
all the things you’d expect A row of old briar pipes, all filthy, a few Greek 
silver coins, a tobacco jar with the arms of old Porteous’s college on it, and a 
little earthenware lamp which he told me he dug up on some mountain in 
Sicily Over the mantelpiece there are photos of Greek statues There’s a big 
one in the middle, of a woman with wings and no head who looks as if she was 
stepping out to catch a bus I remember how shocked old Porteous was when 
the first time I saw it, not knowing any better, I asked him why they didn’t 
stick a head on it 

Porteous started refilling his pipe from the jar on the mantelpiece 

‘That intolerable woman upstairs has purchased a wireless set,’ he said ‘I 
had been hoping to live the rest of my life out of the sound of those things I 
suppose there is nothing one can do? Do you happen to know the legal 
position?’ 

I told him there was nothing one could do I rather like the Oxfordy way he 
says ‘intolerable’, and it tickles me, m 1938, to find someone objecting to 
having a radio in the house Porteous was strolling up and down in his usual 
dreamy way, with his hands in his coat pockets and his pipe between his teeth, 
and almost instantly he’d begun talking about some law against musical 
instruments that was passed m Athens in the time of Pericles It’s always that 
way with old Porteous All his talk is about things that happened centuries ago 
Whatever you start off with it always comes back to statues and poetry and the 
Greeks and Romans If you mention the Queen Mary he’d start telling you 
about Phoenician triremes. He never reads a modern book, refuses to know 
their names, never looks at any newspaper except The Times , and takes a pride 
m telling you that he’s never been to the pictures Except for a few poets like 
Keats and Wordsworth he thinks the modern world-and from his point of 
view the modem world is the last two thousand years-just oughtn’t to have 
happened 

I’m part of the modern world myself, but I like to hear him talk He’ll stroll 
round the shelves and haul out first one book and then another, and now and 
again he’ll read you a piece between little puffs of smoke, generally having to 
translate it from the Latin or something as he goes It’s all kind of peaceful, 
kind of mellow All a little like a school-master, and yet it soothes you, 
somehow. While you listen you aren’t in the same world as trams and gas bills 



Coming up for Air 52 3 

and insurance companies It’s all temples and olive trees, and peacocks and 
elephants, and chaps in the arena with their nets and tridents, and winged lions 
and eunuchs and galleys and catapults, and generals m brass armour galloping 
their horses over the soldiers’ shields It’s funny that he ever cottoned on to a 
chap like me But it’s one of the advantages of being fat that you can fit into 
almost any society Besides we meet on common ground when it comes to dirty 
stories They’re the one modern thing he cares about, though, as he’s always 
reminding me, they aren’t modern. He’s rather old-maidish about it, always 
tells a story m a veiled kind of way Sometimes he’ll pick out some Latin poet 
and translate a smutty rhyme, leaving a lot to your imagination, or he’ll drop 
hints about the private lives of the Roman emperors and the things that went 
on in the temples of Ashtaroth They seem to have been a bad lot, those Greeks 
and Romans Old Porteous has got photographs of wall-pamtmgs somewhere 
in Italy that would make your hair curl 

When I’m fed up with business and home life it’s often done me a lot of good 
to go and have a talk with Porteous But tomght it didn’t seem to Mymmdwas 
still running on the same lines as it had been all day Just as I’d done with the 
Left Book Club lecturer, I didn’t exactly listen to what Porteous was saying, 
only to the sound of his voice But whereas the lecturer’s voice had got under 
my skin, old Porteous’s didn’t It was too peaceful, too Oxfordy Finally, when 
he was in the middle of .saying something, I chipped m and said 
‘Tell me, Porteous, what do you think of Hitler?’ 

Old Porteous was leaning in his lanky, graceful kind of way with his elbows 
on the mantelpiece and a foot on the fender He was so surprised that he almost 
took his pipe out of his mouth 

‘Hitler? This German person? My dear fellow 1 1 don't think of him ’ 

‘But the trouble is he’s going to bloody well make us think about him before 
he’s finished ’ 

Old Porteous shies a bit at the world ‘bloody’, which he doesn’t like, though 
of course it’s part of his pose never to be shocked He begins walking up and 
down again, puffing out smoke 

‘I see no reason for paying any attention to him A mere adventurer These 
people come and go Ephemeral, purely ephemeral 5 
I’m not certain what the word ‘ephemeral’ means, but I stick to my point: 
‘I think you’ve got it wrong Old Hitler’s something different, So’s Joe 
Stalm They aren’t like these chaps in the old days who crucified people and 
chopped their heads off and so forth, just for the fun of it They’re after 
something quite new-something that’s never been heard of before.’ 

‘My dear fellow* There is nothing new under the sun ’ 

Of course that’s a favourite saying of old Porteous’s. He won’t hear of the 
existence of anything new As soon as you tell him about anything that’s 
happening nowadays he says that exactly the same thing happened m the reign 
of King So-and-so. Even if you bring up things like aeroplanes he tells you that 
they probably had them in Crete, or Mycenae, or wherever it was. I tried to 
explain to him what I’d felt while the little bloke was lecturing and the kind of 
vision I’d had of the bad time that’s coming, but he wouldn’t listen. Merely 



524 Coming up for Air 

repeated that there’s nothing new under the sun Finally he hauls a book out of 
the shelves and reads me a passage about some Greek tyrant back in the b c s 
who certainly might have been Hitler’s twin brother 
The argument went on for a bit All day I’d been wanting to talk to 
somebody about this business It’s funny I’m not a fool, but I’m not a 
highbrow either, and God knows at normal times I don’t have many interests 
that you wouldn’t expect a middle-aged seven-pound-a-weeker with two kids 
to have And yet I’ve enough sense to see that the old life we’re used to is being 
sawn off at the roots I can feel it happening I can see the war that’s coming 
and I can see the after-war, the food-queues and the secret police and the 
loudspeakers telling you what to think And I’m not even exceptional m this 
There are millions of others like me Ordinary chaps that I meet everywhere, 
chaps I run across m pubs, bus drivers, and travelling salesmen for hardware 
firms, have got a feeling that the world’s gone wrong They can feel things 
cracking and collapsing under their feet And yet here’s this learned chap, 
who’s lived all his life with books and soaked himself in history till it’s runmng 
out of his pores, and he can’t even see that things are changing Doesn’t think 
Hitler matters Refuses to believe there’s another war coming In any case, as 
he didn’t fight m the last war, it doesn’t enter much into his thoughts-he 
thinks it was a poor show compared with the siege of Troy Doesn’t see why 
one should bother about the slogans and the loudspeakers and the coloured 
shirts What intelligent person would pay any attention to such things? he 
always says Hitler and Stalm will pass away, but something which old 
Porteous calls ‘the eternal verities’ won’t pass away This, of course, is simply 
another way of saying that things will always go on exactly as he’s known them 
For ever and ever, cultivated Oxford blokes will stroll up and down studies full 
of books, quoting Latin tags and smoking good tobacco out of jars with coats of 
arms on them Really it was no use talking to him I’d have got more change 
out of the lad with tow-coloured hair By degrees the conversation twisted off, 
as it always does, to things that happened b c Then it worked round to poetry 
Finally old Porteous drags another book out of the shelves and begins reading 
Keat’s ‘Ode to a Nightingale’ (or maybe it was a skylark- 1 forget) 

So far as I’m concerned a little poetry goes a long way But it’s a curious fact 
that I rather like hearing old Porteous reading it aloud There’s no question 
that he reads well He’s got the habit, of course-used to reading to classes of 
boys He’ll lean up against something in his lounging way, with his pipe 
between his teeth and little jets of smoke coming out, and his voice goes kind of 
solemn and rises and falls with the line You can see that it moves him in some 
way I don’t know what poetry is or what it’s supposed to do I imagine it has a 
kind of nervous effect on some people like music has on others When he’s 
reading I don’t actually listen, that’s to say I don’t take m the words, but 
sometimes the sound of it Brings a kind of peaceful feeling into my mind On 
the whole I like it. But somehow tonight it didn’t work It was as if a cold 
draught had blown into the room I just felt that this was all bunk Poetry 1 
What is it? Just a voice, a bit of an eddy in the air And Gosh' what use would 
that be against machine-guns? 



Coming up for Air 5 25 

I watched him leaning up against the bookshelf Funny, these public-school 
chaps Schoolboys all their days Whole life revolving round the old school and 
their bits of Latin and Greek and poetry And suddenly I remembered that 
almost the first time I was here with Porteous he’s read me the very same 
poem Read it in just the same way, and his voice quivered when he got to the 
same bit-the bit about magic casements, or something And a curious thought 
struck me He's dead He’s a ghost All people like that are dead 

It struck me that perhaps a lot of the people you see walking about are dead 
We say that a man’s dead when his heart stops and not before It seems a bit 
arbitrary After all, parts of your body don’t stop workmg-hair goes on 
growing for years, for instance Perhaps a man really dies when his brain stops, 
when he loses the power to take m a new idea Old Porteous is like that 
Wonderfully learned, wonderfully good taste-but he’s not capable of change 
Just says the same things and thinks the same thoughts over and over again 
There are a lot of people like that Dead minds, stopped inside Just keep 
moving backwards and forwards on the same little track, getting fainter all the 
time, like ghosts 

Old Porteous’s mind, I thought, probably stopped working at about the 
time of the Russo-Japanese War And it’s a ghastly thing that nearly all the 
decent people, the people who don't want to go round smashing faces in with 
spanners, are like that They’re decent, but their minds have stopped They 
can’t defend themselves against what’s coming to them, because they can’t see 
it, even when it’s under their noses They think that England will never change 
and that England’s the whole world Can’t grasp that it’s just a left-over, a tiny 
corner that the bombs happen to have missed But what about the new kind of 
men from eastern Europe, the streamlined men who think m slogans and talk 
m bullets^ They’re on our track Not long before they catch up with us No 
Marquess of Queensbury rules for those boys And all the decent people are 
paralysed Dead men and live gorillas Doesn’t seem to be anything between 

I cleared out about half an hour later, having completely failed to convince 
old Porteous that Hitler matters I was still thinking the same thoughts as I 
walked home through the shivery streets The trams had stopped running 
The house was all dark and Hilda was asleep I dropped my false teeth into the 
glass of water in the bathroom, got into my pyjamas, and prised Hilda over to 
the other side of the bed She rolled over without waking, and the kind of 
hump between her shoulders was towards me It’s funny, the tremendous 
gloom that sometimes gets hold of you late at night At that moment the 
destiny of Europe seemed to me more important than the rent and the kids’ 
school-bills and the work I’d have to do tomorrow For anyone who has to earn 
his living such thoughts are just plain foolishness But they didn’t move out of 
my mmd Still the vision of the coloured shirts and the machine-guns rattling 
The last thing I remember wondering before I fell asleep was why the hell a 
chap like me should care 



2 


The primroses had started I suppose it was some time m March 

I’d driven through Westerham and was making for Pudley I’d got to do an 
assessment of an ironmonger’s shop, and then, if I could get hold of him, to 
interview a life-insurance case who was wavermg in the balance His name had 
been sent in by our local agent, but at the last moment he’d taken fright and 
begun to doubt whether he could afford it I’m pretty good at talking people 
round It’s being fat that does it It puts people in a cheery kind of mood, 
makes ’em feel that signing a cheque is almost a pleasure Of course there are 
different ways of tackling different people With some it’s better to lay all the 
stress on the bonuses, others you can scare in a subtle way with hints about 
what’ll happen to their wives if they die uninsured 

The old car switchbacked up and down the curly little hills And by God, 
what a day 1 You know the kind of day that generally comes some time m March 
when winter suddenly seems to give up fighting For days past we’d been 
having the kind of beastly weather that people call ‘bright’ weather, when the 
sky’s a cold hard blue and the wind scrapes you like a blunt razor-blade Then 
suddenly the wind had dropped and the sun got a chance You know the kind 
of day. Pale yellow sunshine, not a leaf stirring, a touch of mist m the far 
distance where you could see the sheep scattered over the hillsides like lumps 
of chalk. And down m the valleys fires were burning, and the smoke twisted 
slowly upwards and melted into the mist I’d got the road to myself It was so 
warm you could almost have taken your clothes off 

I got to a spot where the grass beside the road was smothered m primroses A 
patch of clayey soil, perhaps Twenty yards farther on I slowed down and 
stopped The weather was too good to miss. I felt I’d got to get out and have a 
smell at the spring air, and perhaps even pick a few primroses if there was 
nobody coming. I even had some vague notion of picking a bunch of them to 
take home to Hilda 

I switched the engine off and got out I never like leaving the old car running 
m neutral, I’m always half afraid she’ll shake her mudguards off or something 
She’s a 1927 model, and she’s done a biggish mileage When you lift the bonnet 
and look at the engine it reminds you of the old Austrian Empire, all tied 
together with bits of string but somehow keeps plugging along. You wouldn’t 
believe any machine could vibrate in so many directions at once. It’s like the 
motion of the earth, which has twenty-two different kinds of wobble, or so I 
remember reading. If you look at her from behind when she’s running in 



Coming up for Air 527 

neutral it’s for all the world like watching one of those Hawaiian girls dancing 
the hula-hula 

There was a five-barred gate beside the road I strolled over and leaned 
across it Not a soul m sight I hitched my hat back a bit to get the kind of 
balmy feeling of the air against my forehead The grass under the hedge was 
full of primroses Just inside the gate a tramp or somebody had left the remains 
of a fire A little pile of white embers and a wisp of smoke still oozing out of 
them Farther along there was a little bit of a pool, covered over with duck- 
weed The field was winter wheat It sloped up sharply, and then there was a 
fall of chalk and a little beech spinney. A kind of mist of young leaves on the 
trees And utter stillness everywhere Not even enough wind to stir the ashes of 
the fire A lark smgmg somewhere, otherwise not a sound, not even an 
aeroplane 

I stayed there for a bit, leaning over the gate I was alone, quite alone I was 
looking at the field, and the field was looking at me I felt-I wonder whether 
you’ll understand 

What I felt was something that’s so unusual nowadays that to say it sounds 
like foolishness I felt happy I felt that though I shan’t live for ever. I’d be 
quite ready to If you like you can say that that was merely because it was the 
first day of spring Seasonal effect on the sex-glands, or something But there 
was more to it than that Curiously enough, the thing that had suddenly 
convinced me that life was worth living, more than the primroses or the young 
buds on the hedge, was that bit of fire near the gate You know the look of a 
wood fire on a still day The sticks that have gone all to white ash and still keep 
the shape of sticks, and under the ash the kind of vivid red that you can see 
into It’s curious that a red ember looks more alive, gives you more of a feeling 
of life than any living thing There’s something about it, a kind of intensity, a 
vibration - 1 can’t think of the exact words But it lets you know that you’re 
alive yourself It’s the spot on the picture that makes you notice everything 
else 

I bent down to pick a primrose Couldn’t reach lt-too much belly. I 
squatted down on my haunches and picked a little bunch of them Lucky there 
was no one to see me The leaves were kind of crinkly and shaped like rabbits’ 
ears I stood up and put my bunch of primroses on the gatepost Then on an 
impulse I slid my false teeth out of my mouth and had a look at them 

If I’d had a mirror I’d have looked at the whole of myself, though, as a 
matter of fact, I knew what I looked like already A fat man of forty-five, in a 
grey herring-bone suit a bit the worse for wear and a bowler hat Wife, two 
kids, and a house in the suburbs written all over me Red face and boiled blue 
eyes I know, you don’t have to tell me But the thing that struck me, as I gave 
my dental plate the once-over before slipping it back into my mouth, was that 
it doesn’t matter Even false teeth don’t matter I’m fat-yes I look like a 
bookie’s unsuccessful brother-yes No woman will ever go to bed with me 
again unless she’s paid to I know all that. But I tell you I don’t care I don’t 
want the womens I don’t even want to be young again. I only want to be alive. 
And! was nil ve that moment when I stood looking at the primroses and the red 



5 28 Coming up for Air 

embers under the hedge It’s a feeling inside you, a kind of peaceful feeling, 
and yet it’s like a flame 

Farther down the hedge the pool was covered with duck-weed, so like a 
carpet that if you didn’t know what duck-weed was you might think it was 
solid and step on it I wondered why it is that we’re all such bloody fools Why 
don’t people, instead of the idiocies they do spend their time on, just walk 
round looking at things? That pool, for instance-all the stuff that’s m it Newts, 
water-snails, water-beetles, caddis-flies, leeches, and God knows how many 
other things that you can only see with a microscope The mystery of their 
lives, down there under water You could spend a lifetime watching them, ten 
lifetimes, and still you wouldn’t have got to the end even of that one pool And 
all the while the sort of feeling of wonder, the peculiar flame inside you It’s the 
only thing worth having, and we don’t want it 

But I do want it At least I thought so at that moment And don’t mistake 
what I’m saying. To begin with, unlike most Cockneys, I’m not soppy about 
‘the country’ I was brought up a damn sight too near to it for that I don’t want 
to stop people living in towns, or m suburbs for that matter Let ’em live where 
they like And I’m not suggesting that the whole of humanity could spend the 
whole of their lives wandering round picking primroses and so forth I know 
perfectly well that we’ve got to work It’s only because chaps are coughing 
their lungs out m mines and girls are hammering at typewriters that anyone 
ever has time to pick a flower Besides, if you hadn’t a full belly and a warm 
house you wouldn’t want to pick flowers But that’s not the point Here’s this 
feeling that I get inside me-not often, I admit, but now and again I know it’s a 
good feeling to have What’s more, so does everybody else, or nearly 
everybody It’s just round the corner all the time, and we all know it’s there 
Stop firing that machine-gun! Stop chasing whatever you’re chasing* Calm 
down, get your breath back, let a bit of peace seep into your bones No use We 
don’t do it. Just keep on with the same bloody fooleries 

And the next war coming over the horizon, 1941, they say Three more 
circles of the sun, and then we whizz straight into it The bombs diving down 
on you like black cigars, and the streamlined bullets streaming from the Bren 
machine-guns Not that that wornes me particularly I’m too old to fight 
There’ll be air-raids, of course, but they won’t hit everybody Besides, even if 
that kind of danger exists, it doesn’t really enter into one’s thoughts 
beforehand. As I’ve said several times already, I’m not frightened of the war, 
only the after-war And even that isn’t likely to affect me personally Because 
who’d bother about a chap like me? I’m too fat to be a political suspect No one 
would bump me off or cosh me with a rubber truncheon I’m the ordinary 
middling kind that moves on when the policeman tells him As for Hilda and 
the kids, they’d probably never notice the difference. And yet it frightens me 
The barbed wire! The slogans* The enormous faces* The cork-lined cellars 
Where the executioner plugs you from behind* For that matter it frightens 
Other chaps who are intellectually a good deal dumber than I am But why! 
Because it means good-bye to this thing I’ve been telling you about, this 
special feeling inside you. CaU it peace, if you like. But when I say peace I don’t 



Coming up for Air 529 

mean absence of war , 1 mean peace, a feeling in your guts And it’s gone for 
ever if the rubber truncheon boys get hold of us 

I picked up my bunch of primroses and had a smell at them I was thinking 
of Lower Bmfield It was funny how for two months past it had been m and out 
of my mind all the time, after twenty years during which I’d practically 
forgotten it And just at this moment there was the zoom of a car coming up the 
road 

It brought me up with a kind of jolt I suddenly realized what I was 
doing-wandering round picking primroses when I ought to have been going 
through the inventory at that ironmonger’s shop m Pudley What was more, it 
suddenly struck me what I’d look like if those people m the car saw me A fat 
man in a bowler hat holding a bunch of primroses 1 It wouldn’t look right at all 
Fat men mustn’t pick primroses, at any rate m public I just had time to chuck 
them over the hedge before the car came in sight It was a good job I’d done so 
The car was full of young fools of about twenty How they’d have sniggered if 
they’d seen me* They were all looking at me-you know how people look at you 
when they’re m a car coming towards you-and the thought struck me that 
even now they might somehow guess what I’d been doing Better let ’em think 
it was something else Why should a chap get out of his car at the side of a 
country road? Obvious 1 As the car went past I pretended to be doing up a fly- 
button 

I cranked up the car (the self-starter doesn’t work any longer) and got in 
Curiously enough, m the very moment when I was doing up the fly-button, 
when my mind was about three-quarters full of those young fools in the other 
car, a wonderful idea had occurred to me 

I’d go back to Lower Bmfield 1 

Why not’ I thought as I jammed her into top gear Why shouldn’t P What 
was to stop me 5 And why the hell hadn’t I thought of it before’ A quiet holiday 
in Lower Bmfield-just the thing I wanted 

Don’t imagine that I had any ideas of going back to live in Lower Bmfield I 
wasn’t planning to desert Hilda and the kids and start life under a different 
name. That kind of thing only happens in books But what was to stop me 
slipping down to Lower Bmfield and having a week there all by myself, on the 
QT’ 

I seemed to have it all planned out m my mmd already It was all right as far 
as the money went There was still twelve quid left in that secret pile of mme, 
and you can have a very comfortable week on twelve qmd I get a fortnight’s 
holiday a year, generally m August or September But if I made up some 
suitable story-relative dymg of incurable disease, or somethmg-I could 
probably get the firm to give me my holiday in two separate halves Then I 
could have a week all to myself before Hilda knew what was happening A wefek 
in Lower Bmfield, with no Hilda, no kids, no Flying Salamander, no Ellesmere 
Road, no rumpus about the hme-fiurchase payments, no noise of traffic driving 
you silly— just a week of loafing round and listening to the quietness? 

But why did I want to go back to Lower Bmfield’ you say Why Lower 
Bmfield in particular? What did I mean to do when I got there? 



3 Coming up for Air 

I didn’t mean to do anything That was part of the point I wanted peace and 
quiet Peace' We had it once, m Lower Binfield I’ve told you something about 
our old life there, before the war I’m not pretending it was perfect I dare say 
it was a dull, sluggish, vegetable kind of life You can say we were like turnips, 
if you like But turnips don’t live in terror of the boss, they don’t lie awake at 
night thinking about the next slump and the next war We had peace inside us 
Of course I knew that even in Lower Binfield life would have changed But the 
place itself wouldn’t have There’d still be the beech woods round Binfield 
House, and the towpath down by Burford Weir, and the horse-trough m the 
market-place I wanted to get back there, just for a week, and let the feeling of 
it soak into me It was a bit like one of these Eastern sages retiring into a desert 
And I should think, the way things are going, there’ll be a good many people 
retiring into the desert during the next few years It’ll be like the time m 
ancient Rome that old Porteous was telling me about, when there were so 
many hermits that there was a waiting list for every cave 
But it wasn’t that I wanted to watch my navel I only wanted to get my nerve 
back before the bad times begin Because does anyone who isn’t dead from the 
neck up doubt that there’s a bad time coming^ We don’t even know what it’ll 
be, and yet we know it’s coming Perhaps a war, perhaps a slump-no knowing, 
except that it’ll be something bad Wherever we’re going, we’re going 
downwards Into the grave, into the cesspool-no knowing And you can’t face 
that kind of thing unless you’ve got the right feeling inside you There’s 
something that’s gone out of us in these twenty years since the war It’s a kind 
of vital juice that we’ve squirted away until there’s nothing left All this 
rushing to and fro 1 Everlasting scramble for a bit of cash Everlasting dm of 
buses, bombs, radios, telephone bells Nerves worn all to bits, empty places m 
our bones where the marrow ought to be 

I shoved my foot down on the accelerator The very thought of going back to 
Lower Binfield had done me good already You know the feeling I had 
Coming up for air 1 Like the big sea-turtles when they come paddling up to the 
surface, stick their noses out and fill their lungs with a great gulp before they 
sink down again among the seaweed and the octopuses We’re all stifling at the 
bottom of a dustbin, but I’d found the way to the top Back to Lower Binfield 1 
I kept my foot on the accelerator until the old car worked up to her maximum 
speed of nearly forty miles an hour She was rattling like a tin tray full of 
crockery, and under cover of the noise I nearly started singing 
Of course the fly in the milk-jug was Hilda That thought pulled me up a bit 
I slowed down to about twenty to think it over 
There wasn’t much doubt Hilda would find out sooner or later. As to getting 
only a week’s holiday m August, I might be able to pass that off all right I 
could tell her the firm were only giving me a week this year Probably she 
wouldn’t ask too many questions about that, because she’d jump at the chance 
of cutting down the holiday expenses. The kids, in any case, always stay at the 
seaside for a month. Where the difficulty came in was finding an alibi for that 
week in May I couldn’t just clear off without notice. Best thing, I thought, 
would be to tell her a good while ahead that I was being sent on some special 



Coming up for Air 531 

job to Nottingham, or Derby, or Bristol, or some other place a good long way 
away If I told her about it two months ahead it would look as if I hadn’t 
anything to hide 

But of course she’d find out sooner or later Trust Hilda' She’d start off by 
pretending to believe it, and then, in that quiet, obstinate way she has, she’d 
nose out the fact that I’d never been to Nottingham or Derby or Bristol or 
wherever it might be It’s astonishing how she does it Such perseverance' She 
lies low till she’s found out all the weak points in your alibi, and then suddenly, 
when you’ve put your foot in it by some careless remark, she starts on you 
Suddenly comes out with the whole dossier of the case ‘Where did you spend 
Saturday night? That’s a lie' You’ve been off with a woman Look at these 
hairs I found when I was brushing your waistcoat Look at them' Is my hair 
that colour?’ And then the fun begins Lord knows how many times it’s 
happened Sometimes she’s been right about the woman and sometimes she’s 
been wrong, but the after-effects are always the same Nagging for weeks on 
end' Never a meal without a row-and the kids can’t make out what it’s all 
about The one completely hopeless thing would be to tell her just where I’d 
spent that week, and why If I explained till the Day of Judgment she’d never 
believe that 

But, hell' I thought, why bother? It was a long way off You know how 
different these things seem before and after I shoved my foot down on the 
accelerator again I’d had another idea, almost bigger than the first I wouldn’t 
go in May I’d go m the second half of June, when the coarse-fishmg season 
had started, and I’d go fishing' 

Why not, after all? I wanted peace, and fishing is peace And then the biggest 
idea of all came into my head and very nearly made me swing the car off the 
road 

I’d go and catch those big carp in the pool at Bmfield House' 

And once again, why not? Isn’t it queer how we go through life, always 
thinking that the things we want to do are the things that can’t be done? Why 
shouldn’t I catch those carp? And yet, as soon as the idea’s mentioned, doesn’t 
it sound to you like something impossible, something that just couldn’t 
happen? It seemed so to me, even at that moment It seemed to me a kind of 
dope-dream, like the ones you have of sleeping with film stars or winning the 
heavyweight championship And yet it wasn’t in the least impossible, it wasn’t 
even improbable Fishing can be rented Whoever owned Bmfield House now 
would probably let the pool if they got enough for it And Gosh' I’d be glad to 
pay five pounds for a day’s fishing m that pool For that matter it was quite 
likely that the house was still empty and nobody even knew that the pool 
existed, 

I thought of it m the dark place among the trees, waiting for me all those 
years And the huge black fish still gliding round it Jesus! If they were that size 
thirty years ago, what would they be like now 7 



3 


It was June the seventeenth, Friday, the second day of the coarse-fishing 
season 

I hadn’t had any difficulty in fixing things with the firm As for Hilda, I’d 
fitted her up with a story that was all shipshape and watertight I’d fixed on 
Birmingham for my alibi, and at the last moment I’d even told her the name of 
the hotel I was going to stay at, Rowbottom’s Family and Commercial I 
happened to know the address because I’d stayed there some years earlier At 
the same time I didn’t want her writing to me at Birmingham, which she might 
do if I was away as long as a week After thinking it over I took young 
Saunders, who travels for Glisso Floor Polish, partly into my confidence. He’d 
happened to mention that he’d be passing through Birmingham on the 
eighteenth of June, and I got him to promise that he’d stop on his way and post 
a letter from me to Hilda, addressed from Rowbottom’s This was to tell her 
that I might be called away and she’d better not write Saunders understood, 
or thought he did He gave me a wink and said I was wonderful for my age So 
that settled Hilda She hadn’t asked any questions, and even if she turned 
suspicious later, an alibi like that would take some breaking 

I drove through Westerham It was a wonderful June morning A faint 
breeze blowing, and the elm tops swaying in the sun, little white clouds 
streaming across the sky like a flock of sheep, and the shadows chasing each 
other across the fields Outside Westerham a Walls’ Ice Cream lad, with cheeks 
like apples, came tearing towards me on his bike, whistling so that it went 
through your head It suddenly reminded me of the time when I’d been an 
errand boy myself (though m those days we didn’t have free-wflqejhikes) and I 
very nearly stopped him and took one They’d cut the hay m places, but they 
hadn’t got it m yet It lay drying m long shiny rows, and the smell of it drifted 
across the road and got mixed up with the petrol 

I drove along at a gentle fifteen, The morning had a kind of peaceful, dreamy 
feeling The ducks floated about on the ponds as if they felt too satisfied to eat. 
In Nettlefield, the village beyond Westerham, a little man m a white apron, 
'With grey flair and a huge grey moustache, darted across the green, planted 
himself in the middle of the road and began doing physical jerks to attract my 
attention My car’s known all along this road, of course I pulled up. It’s only 
Mr Weaver, who keeps the village general shop No, he doesn’t want to insure 
his life, nor his shop either He’s merely run out of change and wants to know 
whether I’ve got a quid’s worth of ‘large silver’ They never have any change in 



Coming up for Air 533 

Nettlefield, not even at the pub 

I drove on The wheat would have been as tall as your waist It went 
undulating up and down the hills like a great green carpet, with the wind 
rippling it a little, kind of thick and silky-looking It’s like a woman, I thought 
It makes you want to lie on it And a bit ahead of me I saw the sign-post where 
the road forks right for Pudley and left for Oxford 

I was still on my usual beat, inside the boundary of my own ‘district’, as the 
firm calls it The natural thing, as I was going westward, would have been to 
leave London along the Uxbridge Road But by a kind of instinct I’d followed 
my usual route The fact was I was feeling guilty about the whole business I 
wanted to get well away before I headed for Oxfordshire And in spite of the 
fact that I’d fixed things so neatly with Hilda and the firm, m spite of the twelve 
quid in my pocket-book and the suitcase m the back of the car, as I got nearer 
the crossroads I actually felt a temptation - 1 knew I wasn’t going to succumb 
to it, and yet it was a temptation-to chuck the whole thing up I had a sort of 
feeling that so long as I was driving along my normal beat I was still inside the 
law It’s not too late, I thought There’s still time to do the respectable thing I 
could run into Pudley, for instance, see the manager of Barclay’s Bank (he’s 
our agent at Pudley) and find out if any new business had come m For that 
matter I could even turn round, go back to Hilda, and make a clean breast of 
the plot 

I slowed down as I got to the corner Should I or shouldn’t P For about a 
second I was really tempted But no f I tooted the klaxon and swung the car 
westward, on to the Oxford road 

Well, I’d done it I was on the forbidden ground It was true that five miles 
farther on, if I wanted to, I could turn to the left again and get back to 
Westerham. But for the moment I was headed westward Strictly speaking I 
was in flight And what was curious, I was no sooner on the Oxford road than I 
felt perfectly certain that they knew all about it When I say they I mean all the 
people who wouldn’t approve of a trip of this kind and who’d have stopped me 
if they could-which, I suppose, would mclude pretty well everybody 

What was more, I actually had a feeling that they were after me already. The 
whole lot of them 1 All the people who couldn’t understand why a middle-aged 
man with false teeth should sneak away for a quiet week in the place where he 
spent his boyhood And all the mean-minded bastards who could understand 
only too well, and who’d raise heaven and earth to prevent it They were all on 
my track It was as if a huge army were streaming up the road behind me. I 
seemed to see them m my mind’s eye, Hilda was m front, of course, with the 
kids tagging after her, and Mrs Wheeler driving her forward with a grim, 
vindictive expression, and Miss Minns rushing along m the rear, with her 
pince-nez slipping down and a look of distress on her face, like the hen that 
gets left behind when the others have got hold of the bacon rind. And Sir 
Herbert Crum and the higher-ups of the Flying Salamander m their Rolls- 
Royces and Hispano-Suizas And all the chaps at the office, and all the poor 
down-trodden pen-pushers from Ellesmere Road and from all such other 
roads, some of them wheeling prams and mowing-machines and concrete 



554 Coming up for Air 

garden-rollers, some of them chugging along m little Austin Sevens And all 
the soul-savers and Nosey Parkers, the people whom you’ve never seen but 
who rule your destiny all the same, the Home Secretary, Scotland Yard, the 
Temperance League, the Bank of England, Lord Beaverbrook, Hitler and 
Stalm on a tandem bicycle, the bench of Bishops, Mussolini, the Pope-they 
were all of them after me I could almost hear them shouting 

‘There’s a chap who thinks he’s going to escape 1 There’s a chap who says he 
won’t be streamlined’ He’s going back to Lower Binfield’ After him’ Stop 
him 1 ’ 

It’s queer The impression was so strong that I actually took a peep through 
the little window at the back of the car to make sure I wasn’t being followed 
Guilty conscience, I suppose But there was nobody Only the dusty white 
road and the long line of the elms dwindling out behind me 

I trod on the gas and the old car rattled into the thirties A few minutes later 
I was past the Westerham turning So that was that I’d burnt my boats This 
was the idea which, in a dim sort of way, had begun to form itself in my mind 
the day I got my new false teeth 



PART IV 


i 


I came towards Lower Bmfield over Chamford Hill There are four roads into 
Lower Bmfield, and it would have been more direct to go through Walton But 
I’d wanted to come over Chamford Hill, the way we used to go when we hiked 
home from fishing m the Thames When you get just past the crown of the hill 
the trees open out and you can see Lower Bmfield lying m the valley below 
you 

It’s a queer experience to go over a bit of country you haven’t seen m twenty 
years You remember it m great detail, and you remember it all wrong All the 
distances are different, and the landmarks seem to have moved about You 
keep feeling, surely this hill used to be a lot steeper-surely that turning was on 
the other side of the road? And on the othqr hand you’ll have memories which 
are perfectly accurate, but which only belong to one particular occasion You’ll 
remember, for instance, a corner of a field, on a wet day in winter, with the 
grass so green that it’s almost blue, and a rotten gatepost covered with lichen 
and a cow standing in the grass and looking at you And you’ll go back after 
twenty years and be surprised because the cow isn’t standing m the same place 
and looking at you with the same expression 

As I drove up Chamford Hill I realized that the picture I’d had of it in my 
mind was almost entirely imaginary But it was a fact that certain things had 
changed The road was tarmac, whereas in the old days it used to be macadam 
(I remember the bumpy feeling of it under the bike), and it seemed to have got 
a lot wider And there were far less trees In the old days there used to be huge 
beeches growing m the hedgerows, and m places their boughs met across the 
road and made a kind of arch Now they were all gone I’d nearly got to the top 
of the hill when I came on something which was certainly new To the right of 
the road there was a whole lot of fake-picturesque houses, with overhanging 
eaves and rose pergolas and what-not You know the kind of houses that are 
just a little too high-class to stand in a row, and so they’re dotted about in a 
kind of colony, with private roads leading up to them And at the entrance to 
one of the private roads there was a huge white board which said 



$$6 Coming up for Air 

THE KENNELS 

PEDIGREE SEALYHAM PUPS 
DOGS BOARDED 

Surely that usen’t to be there? 

I thought for a moment Yes, I remembered 1 Where those houses stood 
there used to be a little oak plantation, and the trees grew too close together, so 
that they were very tall and thin, and in spring the ground underneath them 
used to be smothered m anemones Certainly there were never any houses as 
far out of the town as this 

I got to the top of the hill Another minute and Lower Bmfield would be in 
sight Lower Bmfield' Why should I pretend I wasn’t excited'? At the very 
thought of seeing it again an extraordinary feeling that started m my guts crept 
upwards and did something to my heart Five seconds more and I’d be seeing 
it Yes, here we are' I declutched, trod on the foot-brake, and- Jesus' 

Oh, yes, I knowhow knew what was coming But I didn’t You can say I was 
a bloody fool not to expect it, and so I was But it hadn’t even occurred to me 

The first question was, where was Lower Binfield? 

I don’t mean that it had been demolished It had merely been swallowed 
The thing I was looking down at was a good-sized manufacturing town I 
remember-Gosh, how I remember' and in this case I don’t think my memory 
is far out-what Lower Bmfield used to look like from the top of Chamford 
Hill I suppose the High Street was about a quarter of a mile long, and except 
for a few outlying houses the town was roughly the shape of a cross. The chief 
landmarks were the church tower and the chimney of the brewery At this 
moment I couldn’t distinguish either of them. All I could see was an enormous 
river of brand-new houses which flowed along the valley m both directions and 
half-way up the hills on either side Over to the right there were what looked 
like several acres of bright red roofs all exactly alike A big Council housing 
estate, by the look of it. 

But where was Lower Bmfield? Where was the town I used to know? It 
might have been anywhere All I knew was that it was buried somewhere m the 
middle of that sea of bricks Of the five or six factory chimneys that I could see, 
I couldn’t even make a guess at which belonged to the brewery Towards the 
eastern end of the town there were two enormous factories of glass and 
concrete. That accounts for the growth of the town, I thought, as I began to 
take it in. It occurred to me that the population of this place (it used to be about 
two thousand in the old days) must be a good twenty-five thousand. The only 
thing that hadn’t changed, seemingly, was Binfield House. It wasn’t much 
mm than a dot at that distance, but you could see it on the hillside opposite, 
with the beech trees round it, and the town hadn’t climbed that high. As I 
looked a fleet of black bombing planes came over the hill and zoomed across 
the town. 

l abored ‘the dutch in and started slowly down the hill. The houses had 
dhabed half-way up it. You know those very cheap small houses which run up 



Coming up for Air 537 

a hillside in one continuous row, with the roofs rising one above the other like a 
flight of steps, all exactly the same But a little before I got to the houses I 
stopped again On the left of the road there was something else that was quite 
new The cemetery I stopped opposite the lych-gate to have a look at it 

It was enormous, twenty acres, I should think There’s always a kind of 
jumped-up unhomelike look about a new cemetery, with its raw gravel paths 
and its rough green sods, and the machine-made marble angels that look like 
something off a wedding-cake But what chiefly struck me at the moment was 
that in the old days this place hadn’t existed There was no separate cemetery 
then, only the churchyard I could vaguely remember the farmer these fields 
used to belong to-Blackett, his name was, and he was a dairy-farmer And 
somehow the raw look of the place brought it home to me how things have 
changed It wasn’t only that the town had grown so vast that they needed 
twenty acres to dump their corpses m It was their putting the cemetery out 
here, on the edge of the town Have you noticed that they always do that 
nowadays? Every new town puts its cemetery on the outskirts Shove it 
away-keep it out of sight* Can’t bear to be remmded of death. Even the 
tombstones tell you the same story They never say that the chap underneath 
them ‘died’, it’s always ‘passed away’ or ‘fell asleep’ It wasn’t so m the old 
days We had our churchyard plumb in the middle of the town, you passed it 
every day, you saw the spot where your grandfather was lymg and where some 
day you were going to lie yourself We didn’t mind looking at the dead In hot 
weather, I admit, we also had to smell them, because some of the family vaults 
weren’t too well sealed 

I let the car run down the hill slowly Queer 1 You can’t imagine how queer* 
All the say down the hill I was seeing ghosts, chiefly the ghosts of hedges and 
trees and cows It was as if I was looking at two worlds at once, a kind of thin 
bubble of the thing that used to be, with the thing that actually existed shming 
through it There’s the field where the bull chased Ginger Rodgers' And 
there’s the place where the horse-mushrooms used to grow* But there weren’t 
any fields or any bulls or any mushrooms It was houses, houses everywhere, 
little raw red houses with their grubby window-curtams and their scraps of 
back-garden that hadn’t anything in them except a patch of rank grass or a few 
larkspurs struggling among the weeds And blokes walking up and down, and 
women shaking out mats, and snotty-nosed kids playing along the pavement 
All strangers' They’d all come crowding m while my back was turned And yet 
it was they who’d have looked on me as a stranger, they didn’t know anything 
about the old Lower Bmfield, they’d never heard of Shooter and Wetherall, or 
Mr Grimmett and Uncle Ezekiel, and cared less, you bet 

It’s funny how quickly one adjusts I suppose it was five minutes since I’d 
halted at the top of the hill, actually a bit out of breath at the thought of seeing 
Lower Bmfield again. And already I’d got used to the idea that Lower Bmfield 
had been swallowed up and buried like the lost cities of Peru. I braced up and 
faced it. After all, what else do you expect? Towns have got to grow, people 
have got to live somewhere. Besides, the old town hadn’t been annihilated 
Somewhere or other it still existed, though it had houses round it instead of 



5 28 Coming up for Air 

fields In a few minutes I’d be seeing it again, the church and the brewery 
chimney and Father’s shop-window and the horse-trough m the market-place 
I got to the bottom of the hill, and the road forked I took the left-hand 
turning, and a minute later I was lost 

I could remember nothing I couldn’t even remember whether it was 
hereabouts that the town used to begin All I knew was that m the old days this 
street hadn’t existed For hundreds of yards I was running along lt-a rather 
mean, shabby kmd of street, with the houses giving straight on the pavement 
and here and there a corner grocery or a dingy little pub-and wondering where 
the hell it led to Finally I pulled up beside a woman in a dirty apron and no hat 
who was walking down the pavement I stuck my head out of the window 
‘Beg pardon-can you tell me the way to the market-place?’ 

She ‘couldn’t tell’ Answered in an accent you could cut with a spade 
Lancashire There’s lots of them in the south of England now Overflow from 
the distressed areas Then I saw a bloke in overalls with a bag of tools coming 
along and tried again This time I got the answer m Cockney, but he had to 
think for a moment 

‘Market-place? Market-place? Lessee, now Oh-you mean the Ole Market?’ 
I supposed I did mean the Old Market 
‘Oh, well-you take the right ’and turning-’ 

It was a long way Miles, it seemed to me, though really it wasn’t a mile 
Houses, shops, cinemas, chapels, football grounds-new, all new Again I had 
that feeling of a kind of enemy invasion having happened behind my back All 
these people flooding in from Lancashire and the London suburbs, planting 
themselves down m this beastly chaos, not even bothering to know the chief 
landmarks of the town by name. But I grasped presently why what we used to 
call the market-place was now known as the Old Market There was a big 
square, though you couldn’t properly call it a square, because it was no 
particular shape, m the middle of the new town, with traffic-lights and a huge 
bronze statue of a lion worrying an eagle-the war-memonal, I suppose And 
the newness of everything 1 The raw, mean look' Do you know the look of these 
new towns that have suddenly swelled up like balloons m the last few years, 
Hayes, Slough, Dagenham, and so forth? The kind of chilliness, the bright red 
brick everywhere, the temporary-looking shop-windows full of cut-price 
chocolates and radio parts. It was just like that But suddenly I swung into a 
street with older houses. Gosh 1 The High Street! 

After all my memory hadn’t played tricks on me. I knew every inch of it 
now. Another couple of hundred yards and I’d be m the market-place. The old 
shop was down the other end of the High Street I’d go there after lunch - 1 was 
going to put up at the George, And every inch a memory* I knew all the shops, 
though all die names had changed, and the stuff they dealt m had mostly 
changed as well. There’s Lovegrove’s* And there’s Todd’s* And a big dark 
shop with beams and dormer windows. Used to be Lilywhite’s the draper’s, 
where Elsie used to work. And Gnmmett’s* Still a grocer’s apparently Now 
for die horse-trough in the market-place There was another car ahead of me 
and I couldn’t see 



Coming up for Air 539 

It turned aside as we got into the market-place The horse-trough was gone 

There was an A A man on traffic-duty where it used to stand He gave a 
glance at the car, saw that it hadn’t the A A sign, and decided not to salute 

I turned the corner and ran down to the George The horse-trough being 
gone had thrown me out to such an extent that I hadn’t even looked to see 
whether the brewery chimney was still standing The George had altered too, 
all except the name The front had been dolled up till it looked like one of those 
riverside hotels, and the sign was different It was curious that although till 
that moment I hadn’t thought of it once m twenty years, I suddenly found that 
I could remember every detail of the old sign, which had swung there ever 
since I could remember It was a crude kind of picture, with St George on a 
very thm horse trampling on a very fat dragon, and m the corner, though it was 
cracked and faded, you could read the little signature, ‘Wm Sandford, Painter 
& Carpenter’ The new sign was kind of artistic-looking You could see it had 
been painted by a real artist St George looked a regular pansy The cobbled 
yard, where the farmers’ traps used to stand and the drunks used to puke on 
Saturday nights, had been enlarged to about three times its size and concreted 
over, with garages all round it I backed the car into one of the garages and got 
out 

One thing I’ve noticed about the human mind is that it goes m jerks There’s 
no emotion that stays by you for any length of time During the last quarter of 
an hour I’d had what you could fairly describe as a shock I’d felt it almost like 
a sock in the guts when I stopped at the top of Chamford Hill and suddenly 
realized that Lower Binfield had vanished, and there’d been another little stab 
when I saw the horse-trough was gone I’d driven through the streets with a 
gloomy, Ichabod kind of feeling But as I stepped out of the car and hitched my 
trilby hat on to my head I suddenly felt that it didn’t matter a damn It was 
such a lovely sunny day, and the hotel yard had a kind of summery look, with 
its flowers m green tubs and what-not Besides, I was hungry and looking 
forward to a spot of lunch 

I strolled mto the hotel with a consequential kind of air, with the boots, 
who’d already nipped out to meet me, following with the suitcase, I felt pretty 
prosperous, and probably I looked it A solid business man, you’d have said, at 
any rate if you hadn’t seen the car I was glad I’d come in my new suit-blue 
flannel with a thm white stripe, which suits my style It has what the tailor calls 
a ‘reducing effect’ I believe that day I could have passed for a stockbroker. 
And say what you like it’s a very pleasant thing, on a June day when the sun’s 
shining on the pink geraniums in the window-boxes, to walk into a nice 
country hotel with roast lamb and mint sauce ahead of you. Not that it’s any 
treat to me to stay in hotels, Lord knows I see all too much of them-but 
mnety-nme times out of a hundred it’s those godless ‘family and commercial’ 
hotels, like Rowbottom’s, where I was supposed to be staying at present, the 
kind of places where you pay five bob for bed and breakfast, and the sheets are 
always damp and the bath taps never work. The George had got so smart I 
wouldn’t have known it. In the old days it had hardly been a hotel, only a pub, 
though it had a room or two to let and, used to do a farmers’ lunch (roast beef 



540 Coming up for Air 

and Yorkshire, suet dumpling and Stilton cheese) on market days It all 
seemed different except for the public bar, which I got a glimpse of as I went 
past, and which looked the same as ever I went up a passage with a soft carpet, 
and hunting prints and copper warming-pans and such-like junk hanging on 
the walls And dimly I could remember the passage as it used to be, the 
hollowed-out flags underfoot, and the smell of plaster mixed up with the smell 
of beer A smart-looking young woman, with frizzed hair and a black dress, 
who I suppose was the clerk or something, took my name at the office 
‘You wish for a room, sir’ Certainly, sir What name shall I put down, sir’’ 
I paused After all, this was my big moment She’d be pretty sure to know 
the name It isn’t common, and there are a lot of us m the churchyard We were 
one of the old Lower Binfield families, the Bowlings of Lower Bmfield And 
though in a way it’s painful to be recognized, I’d been rather looking forward 
to it 

‘Bowling,’ I said very distinctly ‘Mr George Bowling ’ 

‘Bowling, sir B-O-A-oh 1 B-O-W’ Yes, sir And you are coming from 
London, sir’’ 

No response Nothing registered She’d never heard of me Never heard of 
George Bowling, son of Samuel Bowlmg-Samuel Bowling who, damn it' had 
had his half-pmt m this same pub every Saturday for over thirty years 


2 


The dining-room had changed, too 

I could remember the old room, though I’d never had a meal there, with its 
brown mantelpiece and its bronzy-yellow wallpaper- 1 never knew whether it 
was meant to be that colour, or had just got like that from age and smoke-and 
the oil-painting, also by Wm Sandford, Painter & Carpenter, of the battle of 
Tel-el-Kebir. Now they’d got the place up in a kind of medieval style Brick 
fireplace with inglenooks, a huge beam across the ceiling, oak panelling on the 
walls, and every bit of it a fake that you could have spotted fifty yards away 
The beam was genuine oak, came out of some old sailing-ship, probably, but it 
didn’t hold anything up, and I had my suspicions of the panels as soon as I set 
eyes on them. As I sat down at my table, and the slick young waiter came 
towards me fiddling with his napkin, I tapped the wall behind me Yes 1 
Thought sot Not even wood. They fake it up with some kind of composition 
and then paint it over 

But the lunch wasn’t bad, I had my lamb and mint sauce, and I had a bottle 
of some white wine or other with a French name which made me belch a bit but 
made me feel happy. There was one other person lunching there, a woman of 
about thirty with fair hair, looked like a widow I wondered whether she was 



Coming up for Air $41 

staying at the George, and made vague plans to get off with her It’s funny how 
your feelings get mixed up Half the time I was seeing ghosts The past was 
sticking out into the present Market day, and the great solid farmers throwing 
their legs under the long table, with their hobnails grating on the stone floor, 
and working their way through a quantity of beef and dumpling you wouldn’t 
believe the human frame could hold And then the little tables with their shiny 
white cloths and wine-glasses and folded napkins, and the faked-up 
decorations and the general expensiveness would blot it out again And I’d 
think, ‘I’ve got twelve quid and a new suit I’m little Georgie Bowling, and 
who’d have believed I’d ever come back to Lower Bmfield in my own motor- 
car?’ And then the wine would send a kind of warm feeling upwards from my 
stomach, and I’d run an eye over the woman with fair hair and mentally take 
her clothes off 

It was the same in the afternoon as I lay about in the lounge-fake-medieval 
again, but it had streamlined leather armchairs and glass-topped tables-with 
some brandy and a cigar I was seeing ghosts, but on the whole I was enjoying 
it As a matter of fact I was a tiny bit boozed and hoping that the woman with 
fair hair would come in so that I could scrape acquaintance She never showed 
up, however It wasn’t till nearly tea-time that I went out 

I strolled up to the market-place and turned to the left The shop* It was 
funny Twenty-one years ago, the day of Mother’s funeral. I’d passed it m the 
station fly, and seen it all shut up and dusty, with the sign burnt off with a 
plumber’s blowflame, and I hadn’t cared a damn And now, when I was so 
much further away from it, when there were actually details about the inside of 
the house that I couldn’t remember, the thought of seeing it again did things to 
my heart and guts I passed the barber’s shop Still a barber’s, though the 
name was different A warm, soapy, almondy smell came out of the door Not 
quite so good as the old smell of bay rum and latakia The shop-our shop- was 
twenty yards farther down Ah' 

An arty-lookmg sign-painted by the same chap as did the one at the George, 
I shouldn’t wonder-hanging out over the pavement 

WENDY’S TEASHOP 

MORNING COFFEE 
HOME-MADE CAKES 


A tea-shop i 

I suppose if it had been a butcher’s or an ironmonger’s, or anything else 
except a seedsman’s, it would have given me the same kind of jolt It’s absurd 
that because you happen to have been born in a certain house you should feel 
that you’ve got rights over it for the rest of your life, but so you do The place 
lived up to its name, all right. Blue curtains in the window, and a cake or two 
standing about, the kind of cake that’s covered with chocolate and has just one 
walnut stuck somewhere on the top I went in I didn’t really want any tea, but 
I had to see the inside 



Coming up for Air 

They’d evidently turned both the shop and what used to be the parlour into 
tea-rooms As for the yard at the back where the dustbin used to stand and 
Father’s little patch of weeds used to grow, they’d paved it all over and dolled 
it up with rustic tables and hydrangeas and things I went through into the 
parlour More ghosts 1 The piano and the texts on the wall, and the two lumpy 
old red armchairs where Father and Mother used to sit on opposite sides of the 
fireplace, reading the People and the News of the World on Sunday afternoons' 
They’d got the place up m an even more antique style than the George, with 
gateleg tables and a hammered-iron chandelier and pewter plates hanging on 
the wall and what-not Do you notice how dark they always manage to make it 
in these arty tea-rooms? It’s part of the antiqueness, I suppose And instead of 
an ordinary waitress there was a young woman m a kind of print wrapper who 
met me with a sour expression I asked her for tea, and she was ten minutes 
getting it You know the kind of tea- China tea, so weak that you could think 
it’s water till you put the milk in I was sitting almost exactly where Father’s 
armchair used to stand I could almost hear his voice, reading out a ‘piece’, as 
he used to call it, from the People, about the new flying machines, or the chap 
who was swallowed by a whale, or something It gave me a most peculiar 
feeling that I was there on false pretences and they could kick me out if they 
discovered who I was, and yet simultaneously I had a kind of longing to tell 
somebody that I’d been bom here, that I belonged to this house, or rather 
(what I really felt) that the house belonged to me There was nobody else 
having tea The girl m the print wrapper was hanging about by the window, 
and I could see that if I hadn’t been there she’d have been picking her teeth I 
bit into one of the slices of cake she’d brought me Home-made cakes' You bet 
they were. Home-made with margarine and egg-substitute But in the end I 
had to speak I said 

‘Have you been in Lower Bmfield long?’ 

She started, looked surprised, and didn’t answer I tried again 
‘I use'd to live in Lower Bmfield myself, a good while ago ’ 

Again no answer, or only something that I couldn’t hear She gave me a kind 
of frigid look and then gazed out of the window again I saw how it was. Too 
much of a lady to go in for back-chat with customers Besides, she probably 
thought I was trying to get off with her. What was the good of telling her I’d 
been bom m the house? Even if she believed it, it wouldn’t interest her She’d 
never heard of Samuel Bowling, Corn & Seed Merchant I paid the bill and 
cleared out 

I wandered up to the church One thing that I’d been half afraid of, and half 
looking forward to, was being recognized by people I used to know But I 
needn’t have worried, there wasn’t a face I knew anywhere in the streets It 
seemed as if the whole town had got a new population 
When I got to the church I saw why they’d had to have a new cemetery The 
churchyard was full to the brim, and half the graves had names on them that I 
didh^tkaow. But the names I did know were easy enough to find I wandered 
fOUndamong the graves The sexton had just scythed the grass and there was a 
JsmeS of summer even there. They were all alone, all the older folks I’d known 



Coming up for Air $43 

Gravitt the butcher, and Winkle the other seedsman, and Trew, who used to 
keep the George, and Mrs Wheeler from the sweet-shop-they were all lying 
there Shooter and Wetherall were opposite one another on either side of the 
path, just as if they were still singing at each other across the aisle So 
Wetherall hadn’t got his hundred after all Born in ‘43 and ‘departed his life’ m 
1928 But he’d beaten Shooter, as usual Shooter died in ’26 What a time old 
Wetherall must have had those last two years when there was nobody to smg 
against him 1 And old Gnmmett under a huge marble thing shaped rather like a 
veal-and-ham pie, with an iron railing round it, and m the corner a whole batch 
of Simmonses under cheap little crosses All gone to dust Old Hodges with his 
tobacco-coloured teeth, and Lovegrove with his big brown beard, and Lady 
Rampling with the coachman and the tiger, and Harry Barnes’s aunt who had a 
glass eye, and Brewer of the Mill Farm with his wicked old face like something 
carved out of a nut-nothing left of any of them except a slab of stone and God 
knows what underneath 

I found Mother’s grave, and Father’s beside it Both of them m pretty good 
repair The sexton had kept the grass clipped Uncle Ezekiel’s was adittle way 
away They’d levelled a lot of the older graves, and the old wooden head- 
pieces, the ones that used to look like the end of a bedstead, had all been cleared 
away What do you feel when you see your parents’ graves after twenty years? X 
don’t know what you ought to feel, but I’ll tell you what I did feel, and that was 
nothing Father and Mother have never faded out of my mind It’s as if they 
existed somewhere or other in a kind of eternity. Mother behind the brown 
teapot, Father with his bald head a little mealy, and his spectacles and his grey 
moustache, fixed for ever like people in a picture, and yet in some way alive 
Those boxes of bones lying m the ground there didn’t seem to have anything to 
do with them Merely, as I stood there, I began to wonder what you feel like 
when you’re underground, whether you care much and how soon you cease to 
care, when suddenly a heavy shadow swept across me and gave me a bit of a 
start 

I looked over my shoulder It was only a bombing plane which had flown 
between me and the sun The place seemed to be creeping with them 

I strolled into the church For almost the first time since I got back to Lower 
Bmfield I didn’t have the ghostly feeling, or rather I had it in a different form 
Because nothing had changed Nothing, except that all the people were gone 
Even the hassocks looked the same The same dusty, sweetish corpse-smell 
And by God' the same hole m the window, though, as it was evemng and the 
sun was round the other side, the spot of light wasn’t creepmg up the aisle 
They’d still got pews -hadn’t changed over to chairs There was our pew, and 
there was the one m front where Wetherall used to bellow against Shooter 
Sihon king of the Amontes and Og the king of Bashan r And the worn stones in 
the aisle where you could still half-read the epitaphs of the blokes who lay 
beneath them, I squatted down to have a look at the one opposite our pew. I 
still knew the readable bits of it by heart Even the pattern they made seemed 
to have stuck m my memory Lord knows how often I’d read them during the 
sermon 



544 


Coming up for Air 


fon. 


Gent , 
his juft & 


Here 

of this parif h 
upright 

To his manifold private bene 

volences he added a diligent 


beloved wife 

Amelia, by iffue feven 

daughters 

I remembered how the long S’s used to puzzle me as a kid Used to wonder 
whether in the old days they pronounced their S’s as F’s, and if so, why 
There was a step behind me I looked up A chap in a cassock was standing 
over me It was the vicar 

But I mean the vicar' It was old Betterton, who’d been vicar in the old 
days-not, as a matter of fact, ever since I could remember, but since 1904 or 
thereabouts I recognized him at once, though his hair was quite white 
He didn’t recognize me I was only a fat tripper in a blue suit doing a bit of 
sightseeing He said good evening and promptly started on the usual line of 
talk-was I interested m architecture, remarkable old building this, 
foundations go back to Saxon times and so on and so forth And soon he was 
doddering round, showing me the sights, such as they were-Norman arch 
leading into the vestry, brass effigy of Sir Roderick Bone who was killed at the 
Battle of Newbury And I followed him with the kind of whipped-dog air that 
middle-aged businessmen always have when they’re being shown round a 
church or a picture-gallery But did I tell him that I knew it all already ^ Did I 
tell him that I was Georgie Bowling, son of Samuel Bowlmg-he’d have 
remembered my father even if he didn’t remember me-and that I’d not only 
listened to his sermons for ten years and gone to his Confirmation classes, but 
even belonged to the Lower Bmfield Reading Circle and had a go at Sesame 
and Lilies just to please hmP No, I didn’t I merely followed him round, 
making the kind of mumble that you make when somebody tells you that this 
or that is five hundred years old and you can’t think what the hell to say except 
that it doesn’t look it From the moment that I set eyes on him I’d decided to 
let him think I was a stranger As soon as I decently could I dropped sixpence 
in the Church Expenses box and bunked 
But why> Why not make contact, now that at last I’d found somebody I 
knew? 

Because the change in his appearance after twenty years had actually 
frightened me, I suppose you think I mean that he looked older But he didn’t' 
He looked younger. And it suddenly taught me something about the passage of 
time 

,, I suppose old Betterton would be about sixty-five now, so that when I last 
saw ten he’d have been about forty-five-my own present age. His hair was 
white now, and the day he buried Mother it was a kind of streaky grey, like a 
shawhg- brush. And yet as soon as I saw him the first thing that struck me was 
th®E he looked younger. I’d thought of him as an old, old man, and after all he 



Coming up for Air 545 

wasn’t so very old As a boy, it occurred to me, all people over forty had seemed 
to me just worn-out old wrecks, so old that there was hardly any difference 
between them A man of forty-five had seemed to me older than this old 
dodderer of sixty-five seemed now And Christ 1 I was forty-five myself It 
frightened me 

So that’s what I look like to chaps of twenty, I thought as I made off between 
the graves Just a poor old hulk Finished It was curious As a rule I don’t care 
a damn about my age Why should P I’m fat, but I’m strong and healthy I can 
do everything I want to do A rose smells the same to me now as it did when I 
was twenty Ah, but do I smell the same to the rose^ Like an answer a girl, 
might have been eighteen, came up the churchyard lane She had to pass 
within a yard or two of me I saw the look she gave me, just a tiny momentary 
look No, not frightened, not hostile Only kind of wild, remote, like a wild 
animal when you catch its eye She’d been born and grown up m those twenty 
years while I was away from Lower Bmfield All my memories would have 
been meaningless to her Living in a different world from me, like an animal 

I went back to the George I wanted a drink, but the bar didn’t open for 
another half-hour I hung about for a bit, reading a Sporting and Dramatic of 
the year before, and presently the fair-haired dame, the one I thought might be 
a widow, came m I had a sudden desperate yearning to get off with her 
Wanted to show myself that there’s life in the old dog yet, even if the old dog 
does have to wear false teeth After all, I thought, if she’s thirty and I’m forty- 
five, that’s fair enough I was standing in front of the empty fireplace, making 
believe to warm my bum, the way you do on a summer day In my blue suit I 
didn’t look so bad A bit fat, no doubt, but distmgui A man of the world I 
could pass for a stockbroker I put on my tomest accent and said casually 

‘Wonderful June weather we’re having 5 

It was a pretty harmless remark, wasn’t 1P Not in the same class as ‘Haven’t 
I met you somewhere before^’ 

But it wasn’t a success. She didn’t answer, merely lowered for about half a 
second the paper she was reading and gave me a look that would have cracked a 
window It was awful. She had one of those blue eyes that go into you like a 
bullet In that split second I saw how hopelessly I’d got her wrong She wasn’t 
the kind of widow with dyed hair who likes being taken out to dance-halls She 
was upper-middle-class, probably an admiral’s daughter, and been to one of 
those good schools where they play hockey And I’d got myself wrong too 
New suit or no new suit, I couldn't pass for a stockbroker Merely looked like a 
commercial traveller who’d happened to get hold of a bit of dough I sneaked 
off to the private bar to have a pint or two before dinner 

The beer wasn’t the same. I remember the old beer, the good Thames Valley 
beer that used to have a bit of taste in it because it was made out of chalky 
water I asked the barmaid 

‘Have Bessemers’ still got the brewery 

‘Bessemers’ Oo, no 3 sir r They’ve gam Op, years ago-long before we come 
’ere ’ , < m * « * . 

She was a friendly sort, what I cal| the»eWey-.sister type>of barmaid, thirty- 



Coming up for Air 

fivish, with a mild kind efface and the fat arms they develop from working the 
beer-handle She told me the name of the combine that had taken over the 
brewery I could have guessed it from the taste, as a matter of fact The 
different bars ran round m a circle with compartments in between Across m 
the public bar two chaps were playing a game of darts, and m the Jug and 
Bottle there was a chap I couldn’t see who occasionally put in a remark in a 
sepulchral kind of voice The barmaid leaned her fat elbows on the bar and had 
a talk with me I ran over the names of the people I used to know, and there 
wasn’t a single one of them that she’d heard of She said she’d only been in 
Lower Binfield five years She hadn’t even heard of old Trew, who used to 
have the George m the old days 

‘I used to live in Lower Binfield myself,’ I told her ‘A good while back, it 
was, before the war ’ 

‘Before the war? Well, now 1 You don’t look that old ’ 

‘See some changes, I dessay,’ said the chap m the Jug and Bottle 
‘The town’s grown,’ I said ‘It’s the factories, I suppose ’ 

‘Well, of course they mostly work at the factories There’s the gramophone 
works, and then there’s Truefitt Stockings But of course they’re making 
bombs nowadays ’ 

I didn’t altogether see why it was of course, but she began telling me about a 
young fellow who worked at Truefitt’s factory and sometimes came to the 
George, and he’d told her that they were making bombs as well as stockings, 
the two, for some reason I didn’t understand, being easy to combine And then 
she told me about the big military aerodrome near Walton- that accounted for 
the bombing planes I kept seemg-and the next moment we’d started talking 
about the war, as usual Funny It was exactly to escape the thought of war that 
I’d come here But how can you, anyway? It’s in the air you breathe 
I said it was coming in 1 941 The chap in the Jug and Bottle said he reckoned 
it was a bad job The barmaid said it gave her the creeps She said 
‘It doesn’t seem to do much good, does it, after all said and done? And 
sometimes I he awake at night and hear one of those great things going 
overhead, and think to myself, “Well, now, suppose that was to drop a bomb 
right down on top of me 1 ” And all this A,R P , and Miss Todgers, she’s the Air 
Warden, telling you it’ll be all right if you keep your head and stuff the 
windows up with newspaper, and they say they’re going to dig a shelter under 
the Town Hall But the way I look at it is, how could you put a gas-mask on a 
baby?’ 

The chap in the Jug and Bottle said he’d read m the paper that you ought to 
get into a hot bath till it was all over. The chaps m the public bar overheard this 
and there was a bit of a by-play on the subject of how many people could get 
into the same bath, and both of them asked the barmaid if they could share her 
bath with her She told them not to get saucy, and then she went up the other 
end of the bar and hauled them out a couple more pints of old and mild I took a 
Suck at my be&r It was poor stuff Bitter, they call it. And it was bitter, right 
enough, too bitter, a kind of sulphurous taste Chemicals, They say no English 
tops ever go into beer nowadays, they’re all made into chemicals. Chemicals, 



Coming up for Air 547 

on the other hand, are made into beer I found myself thinking about Uncle 
Ezekiel, what he’d have said to beer like this, and what he’d have said about 
ARP and the buckets of sand you’re supposed to put the thermite bombs out 
with As the barmaid came back to my side of the bar I said 
‘By the way, who’s got the Hall nowadays’’ 

We always used to call it the Hall, though its name was Binfield House For a 
moment she didn’t seem to understand 
‘The Hall, sir’’ 

‘’E means Binfield ’Ouse,’ said the chap in the Jug and Bottle 
‘Oh, Binfield House 1 Oo, I thought you meant the Memorial Hall It’s Dr 
Merrall’s got Binfield House now ’ 

‘Dr MerralP’ 

‘Yes, sir He’s got more than sixty patients up there, they say ’ 

‘Patients’ Have they turned it into a hospital, or something’’ 

‘Well-it’s not what you’d call an ordinary hospital More of a sanatorium 
It’s mental patients, reely What they call a Mental Home ’ 

A loony-bin 1 

But after all, what else could you expect’ 


3 


I crawled out of bed with a bad taste in my mouth and my bones creaking 
The fact was that, what with a bottle of wine at lunch and another at dinner, 
and several pints in between, besides a brandy or two, I’d had a bit too much to 
drink the day before For several minutes I stood in the middle of the carpet, 
gazing at nothing in particular and too done-m to make a move You know that 
god-awful feeling you get sometimes in the early morning. It’s a feeling chiefly 
in your legs, but it says to you clearer than any words could do, ‘Why the hell 
do you go on with it’ Chuck it up, old chap 1 Stick your head in the gas oven 1 ’ 
Then I shoved my teeth in and went to the window A lovely June day, 
again, and the sun was Just beginning to slant over the roofs and hit the house- 
fronts on the other side of the street The pink geraniums m the window-boxes 
didn’t look half bad. Although it was only about half past eight and this was 
only a side-street off the market-place there was quite a crowd of people 
coming and going A stream of clerkly-looking chaps in dark suits with 
dispatch-cases were hurrying along, all m the same direction, just as if this had 
been a London suburb and they were scooting for the Tube, and the school- 
kids were straggling up towards the market-place m twos and threes, I had the 
same feehng that I’d had the day before when I saw the jungle of red houses 
that had swallowed Chamford Hill Bloody interlopers 1 Twenty thousand 
gate-crashers who didn’t even know my name And here was all this new life 



Corning up for Air 

swarming to and fro, and here was I, a poor old fatty with false teeth, watching 
them from a window and mumbling stuff that nobody wanted to listen to about 
things that happened thirty and forty years ago Christ' I thought, I was wrong 
to think that I was seeing ghosts Pm the ghost myself Pm dead and they’re 
alive 

But after breakfast-haddock, grilled kidneys, toast and marmalade, and a 
pot of coffee-I felt better The frozen dame wasn’t breakfasting in the dining- 
room, there was a nice summery feeling m the air, and I couldn’t get rid of the 
feeling that in that blue flannel suit of mine I looked just a little bit distmgui By 
God' I thought, if I’m a ghost, I’ll be a ghost' I’ll walk I’ll haunt the old places 
And maybe I can work a bit of black magic on some of these bastards who’ve 
stolen my home town from me 

I started out, but I’d got no farther than the market-place when I was pulled 
up by something I hadn’t expected to see A procession of about fifty school- 
kids was marching down the street m column of fours-quite military, they 
looked-with a gnm-lookmg woman marching alongside of them like a 
sergeant-major The leading four were carrying a banner with a red, white, 
and blue border and britons prepare on it m huge letters The barber 
on the corner had come out on to his doorstep to have a look at them I spoke 
to him He was a chap with shiny black hair and a dull kind of face 

‘What are those kids doing?’ 

‘It’s this here air-raid practice,’ he said vaguely ‘This here ARP Kind of 
practising, like That’s Miss Todgers, that is ’ 

I might have guessed it was Miss Todgers You could see it m her eye You 
know the kind of tough old devil with grey hair and a kippered face that’s 
always put m charge of Girl Guide detachments, YWCA hostels, and what- 
not She had on a coat and skirt that somehow looked like a uniform and gave 
you a strong impression that she was wearing a Sam Browne belt, though 
actually she wasn’t I knew her type Been in the WAACsm the war, and 
never had a day’s fun since This A.R P was jam to her As the kids swung past 
I heard her letting out at them with the real sergeant-major yell, ‘Monica' Lift 
your feet up 1 ’ and I saw that the rear four had another banner with a red, white, 
and blue border, and m the middle 

WE ARE READY ARE YOtP 

‘What do they want to march them up and down for?’ I said to the barber 

T dunno* I s’pose it’s kind of propaganda, like.’ 

I knew, of course. Get the kids war-minded. Give us all the feeling that 
there’s no way out of it, the bombers are coming as sure as Christmas, so down 
to the cell®: you go and don’t argue. Two of the great black planes from Walton 
Were zooming over the eastern end of the town Christ' I thought, when it 
starts It won’t surprise us any more than a shower of ram. Already we’re 
Hstcarngforthefem: bomb. The barber went on to tell me that thanks to Miss 
efforts the school-kids had been served with their gas-masks 

afceady. 



Coming up for A ir 549 

Well, I started to explore the town Two days I spent just wandering round 
the old landmarks, such of them as I could identify And all that time I never 
ran across a soul that knew me I was a ghost, and if I wasn’t actually invisible, 
I felt like it 

It was queer, queerer than I can tell you Did you ever read a story of H.G 
Wells’s about a chap who was m two places at once-that’s to say, he was really 
in his own home, but he had a kind of hallucination that he was at the bottom of 
the sea? He’d been walking round his room, but instead of the tables and chairs 
he’d see the wavy waterweed and the great crabs and cuttlefish reaching out to 
get him Well, it was just like that For hours on end I’d be walking through a 
world that wasn’t there I’d count my paces as I went down the pavement and 
think, ‘Yes, here’s where so-and-so’s field begins The hedge runs across the 
street and slap through that house That petrol pump is really an elm tree And 
here’s the edge of the allotments And this street (it was a dismal little row of 
semi-detached houses called Cumberledge Road, I remember) is the lane 
where we used to go with Katie Simmons, and the nut-bushes grew on both 
sides ’ No doubt I got the distances wrong, but the general directions were 
right I don’t believe anyone who hadn’t happened to be born here would have 
believed that these streets were fields as little as twenty years ago It was as 
though the countryside had been buried by a kind of volcanic eruption from 
the outer suburbs Nearly the whole of what used to be old Brewer’s land had 
been swallowed up m the Council housmg estate The Mill Farm had 
vamshed, the cow-pond where I caught my first fish had been drained and 
filled up and built over, so that I couldn’t even say exactly where it used to 
stand It was all houses, houses, little red cubes of houses all alike, with privet 
hedges and asphalt paths leading up to the front door Beyond the Council 
Estate the town thinned out a bit, but the jerry-builders were doing their best 
And there were little knots of houses dumped here and there, wherever 
anybody had been able to buy a plot of land, and the makeshift roads leading 
up to the houses, and empty lots with builders’ boards, and bits of ruined fields 
covered with thistles and tm cans 

In the centre of the old town, on the other hand, things hadn’t changed 
much, so far as buildings went A lot of the shops were still doing the same line 
of trade, although the names were different Lillywhite’s was still a draper’s, 
but it didn’t look too prosperous What used to be Gravitt’s, the butcher’s, was 
now a shop that sold radio parts Mother Wheeler’s little window had been 
bricked over Gnmmett’s was still a grocer’s, but it had been taken over by the 
International It gives you an idea of the power of these big combines that they 
could even swallow up a cute old skinflint like Grimmett But from what I 
know of him-not to mention that slap-up tombstone m the churchyard- 1 bet 
he got out while the going was good and had ten to fifteen thousand quid to 
take to heaven with him The only shop that was still in the same hands was 
Sarazms’, the people who’d ruined Father. They’d swollen to enormous 
dimensions, and they had another huge branch in the new part of the town. But 
they’d turned into a kind of general store and sold furniture, drugs, hardware, 
and ironmongery as well as the old garden stuff 



550 Coming up for Air 

For the best part of two days I was wandering round, not actually groaning 
and rattling a chain, but sometimes feeling that I’d like to Also I was drinking 
more than was good for me Almost as soon as I got to Lower Binfield I’d 
started on the booze, and after that the pubs never seemed to open quite early 
enough My tongue was always hanging out of my mouth for the last half-hour 
before opemng time 

Mind you, I wasn’t in the same mood all the time Sometimes it seemed to 
me that it didn’t matter a damn if Lower Binfield had been obliterated After 
all, what had I come here for, except to get away from the family^* There was no 
reason why I shouldn’t do all the things I wanted to do, even go fishing if I felt 
like it On the Saturday afternoon I even went to the fishing-tackle shop m the 
High Street and bought a split-cane rod (I’d always pined for a split-cane rod 
as a boy-it’s a little bit dearer than a green-heart) and hooks and gut and so 
forth The atmosphere of the shop cheered me up Whatever else changes, 
fishing-tackle doesn’t-because, of course, fish don’t change either And the 
shopman didn’t see anything funny in a fat middle-aged man buying a fishing- 
rod On the contrary, we had a little talk about the fishing in the Thames and 
the big chub somebody had landed the year before last on a paste made of 
brown bread, honey, and minced boiled rabbit I even-though I didn’t tell 
him what I wanted them for, and hardly even admitted it to myself-bought the 
strongest salmon trace he’d got, and some No 5 roach-hooks, with an eye to 
those big carp at Binfield House, m case they still existed 

Most of Sunday morning I was kind of debating it m my mind-should I go 
fishing, or shouldn’t P One moment I’d think, why the hell not, and the next 
moment it would seem to me that it was just one of those things that you dream 
about and don’t ever do. But m the afternoon I got the car out and drove down 
to Burford Weir I thought I’d just have a look at the river, and tomorrow, if 
the weather was right, maybe I’d take my new fishing-rod and put on the old 
coat and grey flannel bags I had m my suitcase, and have a good day’s fishing 
Three or four days, if I felt like it 

I drove over Chamford Hill Down at the bottom the road turns off and runs 
parallel to the to wpath I got out of the car and walked Ah 1 A knot of little red 
and white bungalows had sprung up beside the road. Might have expected it, 
of course. And there seemed to be a lot of cars standing about As I got nearer 
the nver I came into the sound-yes, plonk-tiddle-tiddle-plonk' -yes, the 
sound of gramphones 

I rounded the bend and came in sight of the towpath Christ' Another jolt 
The place was black with people And where the water-meadows used to 
be-tea-houses, penny-in-the-slot machines, sweet kiosks, and chaps selling 
Walls’ Ice-Cream. Might as well have been at Margate I remember the old 
towpath. You could walk along it for miles, and except for the chaps at the lock 
now and again a bargeman mooching along behind his horse, you’d 
meet never a soul. When we went fishing we always had the place to ourselves 
there a whole afternoon, and a heron might be standing in the 
^sh^ttowwater fifty yards up the bank, and for three or four hours on end there 
■Wouldn’t be anyone passing to scare him away But where had I got the idea 



Coming up for Air 551 

that grown-up men don’t go fishing? Up and down the bank, as far as I could 
see in both directions, there was a continuous chain of men fishing, one every 
five yards I wondered how the hell they could all have got there until it struck 
me that they must be some fishmg-club or other And the river was crammed 
with boats-rowing-boats, canoes, punts, motor-launches, full of young fools 
with next to nothing on, all of them screammg and shouting and most of them 
with a gramphone aboard as well The floats of the poor devils who were trying 
to fish rocked up and down on the wash of the motor-boats 
I walked a little way Dirty, choppy water, m spite of the fine day Nobody 
was catching anything, not even minnows I wondered whether they expected 
to A crowd like that would be enough to scare every fish m creation But 
actually, as I watched the floats rocking up and down among the ice-cream 
tubs and the paper bags, I doubted whether there were any fish to catch Are 
there still fish in the Thames? I suppose there must be And yet I’ll swear the 
Thames water isn’t the same as it used to be Its colour is quite different Of 
course you think that’s merely my imagination, but I can tell you it isn’t so I 
know the water has changed I remember the Thames water as it used to be, a 
kind of luminous green that you could see deep mto, and the shoals of dace 
cruising round the reeds You couldn’t see three inches into the water now It’s 
all brown and dirty, with a film of oil m it from the motor-boats, not to mention 
the fag-ends and the paper bags 

After a bit I turned back Couldn’t stand the noise of the gramophones any 
longer Of course it’s Sunday, I thought Mightn’t be so bad on a week-day 
But after all, I knew I’d never come back God rot them, let ’em keep their 
bloody river Wherever I go fishing it won’t be in the Thames 
The crowds swarmed past me Crowds of bloody aliens, and nearly all of 
them young Boys and girls larking along in couples A troop of girls came past, 
wearing bell-bottomed trousers and white caps like the ones they wear m the 
American Navy, with slogans printed on them One of them, seventeen she 
might have been, had please kiss me I wouldn’t have minded On an impulse I 
suddenly turned aside and weighed myself an one of the penny-in-the-slot 
machines There was a clicking noise somewhere inside lt-you know those 
machines that tell your fortune as well as your weight-and a typewritten card 
came sliding out 

c You are the possessor of exceptional gifts / I read, ‘ but owing to excessive 
modesty you have never received your reward Those about you underrate your 
abilities You are too fond of standing aside and allowing others to take the credit 
for what you have done yourself . You are sensitive, affectionate , and always loyal 
to your friends You are deeply attractive to the opposite sex Your worst fault is 
generosity Persevere, for you will rise high f 
Weight 14 stone 11 pounds ’ 

I’d put on four pounds in the last three days, I noticed. Must have been the 
booze 



4 


I drove back to the George, dumped the car m the garage, and had a late cup of 
tea As it was Sunday the bar wouldn’t open for another hour or two In the 
cool of the evening I went out and strolled up in the directon of the church 
I was just crossing the market-place when I noticed a woman walking a little 
way ahead of me As soon as I set eyes on her I had a most peculiar feeling that 
I’d seen her somewhere before You know that feeling I couldn’t see her face, 
of course, and so far as her back view went there was nothing I could identify, 
and yet I could have sworn I knew her 

She went up the High Street and turned down one of the side-streets to the 
right, the one where Uncle Ezekiel used to have his shop I followed I don’t 
quite know why-partly curiosity, perhaps, and partly as a kind of precaution 
My first thought had been that here at last was one of the people I’d known m 
the old days in Lower Binfield, but almost at the same moment it struck me 
that it was just as likely that she was someone from West Bletchley In that case 
I’d have to watch my step, because if she found out I was here she’d probably 
split to Hilda So I followed cautiously, keeping at a safe distance and 
examining her back view as well as I could There was nothing striking about 
it. She was a talhsh, fattish woman, might have been forty or fifty, m a rather 
shabby black dress She’d no hat on, as though she’d just slipped out of her 
house for a moment, and the way she walked gave you the impression that her 
shoes were down at heel All in all, she looked a bit of a slut And yet there was 
nothing to identify, only that vague something which I knew I’d seen before It 
was something in her movements, perhaps Presently she got to a little sweet 
and paper shop, the kind of little shop that always keeps open on a Sunday 
The woman who kept it was standing in the doorway, doing something to a 
stand of postcards. My woman stopped to pass the time of day 
I stopped too, as soon as 1 could find a shop window which I could pretend 
to be looking into It was a plumber’s and decorator’s, full of samples of 
wallpaper and bathroom fittings and things By this time I wasn’t fifteen yards 
away from the other two. I could hear their voices coomg away in one of those 
meaningless conversations that women have when they’re just passing the time 
of dayf^Yes, thafs jest about it That’s j‘est where it is I said to him myself, I 
aa44***WfcIl, what else do you expect?” I said It don’t seem right, do it? But 
wham’s the use, you might as well talk to a stone It’s a shame!’ and so on and so 
was getting warmer Obviously my woman was a small shopkeeper’s 
wife, like the other. I was just wondering whether she mightn’t be one of the 



Coming up for Air 553 

people I’d known in Lower Binfield after all, when she turned almost towards 
me and I saw three-quarters of her face And Jesus Christ' It was Elsie' 

Yes, it was Elsie No chance of mistake Elsie' That fat hag' 

It gave me such a shock-not, mind you, seeing Elsie, but seeing what she’d 
grown to be like-that for a moment things swam m front of my eyes The brass 
taps and ballstops and porcelain sinks and things seemed to fade away into the 
distance, so that I both saw them and didn’t see them Also for a moment I was 
in a deadly funk that she might recognize me But she’d looked bang in my face 
and hadn’t made any sign A moment more, and she turned and went on Again 
I followed It was dangerous, she might spot I was following her, and that 
might start her wondering who I was, but I just had to have another look at 
her The fact was that she exercised a kind of horrible fascination on me In a 
manner of speaking I’d been watching her before, but I watched her with quite 
different eyes now 

It was horrible, and yet I got a kind of scientific kick out of studying her back 
view It’s frightening, the things that twenty-four years can do to a woman 
Only twenty-four years, and the girl I’d known, with her milky-white skin and 
red mouth and kind of dull-gold hair, had turned into this great round- 
shouldered hag, shambling along on twisted heels It made me feel downright 
glad I’m a man No man ever goes to pieces quite so completely as that I’m fat, 
I grant you I’m the wrong shape, if you like But at least I’m a shape Elsie 
wasn’t even particularly fat, she was merely shapeless Ghastly things had 
happened to her hips As for her waist, it had vanished She was just a kind of 
soft lumpy cylinder, like a bag of meal 
I followed her a long way, out of the old town and through a lot of mean little 
streets I didn’t know Finally she turned in at the doorway of another shop By 
the way she went m, it was obviously her own I stopped for a moment outside 
the window ‘G Cookson, Confectioner and Tobacconist ’ So Elsie was Mrs 
Cookson It was a mangy little shop, much like the other one where she’d 
stopped before, but smaller and a lot more flyblown. Didn’t seem to sell 
anything except tobacco and the cheapest kinds of sweets I wondered what I 
could buy that would take a minute or two Then I saw a rack of cheap pipes m 
the window, and I went in I had to brace my nerve up a little before I did it, 
because there’d need to be some hard lying if by any chance she recognized me 
She’d disappeared into the room behind the shop, but she came back as I 
tapped on the counter So we were face to face Ah' no sign Didn’t recognize 
me Just looked at me the way they do You know the way small shopkeepers 
look at their customers-utter lack of interest 
It was the first time I’d seen her full face, and though I half expected what I 
saw, it gave me almost as big a shock as that first moment when I’d recognized 
her I suppose when you look at the face of someone young, even of a child, you 
ought to be able to foresee what it’ll look like when it’s old. It’s all a question of 
the shape of the bones. But if it had ever occurred to me, when I was twenty 
and she was twenty-two, to wonder what Elsie would look like at forty-seven, 
it wouldn’t have crossed my mind that she could ever look like that The whole 
face had kind of sagged, as if it had somehow been drawn downwards Do you 



554 Coming up for Air 

know that type of middle-aged woman that has a face just like a bulldog’ Great 
uhderhung jaw, mouth turned down at the corners, eyes sunken, with pouches 
underneath Exactly like a bulldog And yet it was the same face. I’d have 
known it m a million Her hair wasn’t completely grey, it was a kind of dirty 
colour, and there was much less of it than there used to be She didn’t know me 
from Adam I was just a customer, a stranger, an uninteresting fat man It’s 
queer what an inch or two of fat can do I wondered whether I’d changed even 
more than she had, or whether it was merely that she wasn’t expecting to see me, 
or whether-what was the likeliest of all-she’s simply forgotten m\ existence 

‘Devemng,’ she said, in that listless way they have 

‘I want a pipe,’ I said flatly ‘A briar pipe ’ 

l A pipe Now jest lemme see I know we gossome pipes somewhere Now 
where did I -ah' ’Ere we are ’ 

She took a cardboard box full of pipes from somewhere under the counter 
How bad her accent had got' Or maybe I was just imagining that, because my 
own standards had changed’ But no, she used to be so ‘superior’, all the girls at 
Lilywhite’s were so ‘superior’, and she’d been a member of the vicar’s Reading 
Circle I swear she never used to drop her aitches It’s queer how these women 
go to pieces once they’re married I fiddled among the pipes for a moment and 
pretended to look them over Finally I said I’d like one with an amber 
mouthpiece 

‘Amber’ I don’t know as we got any-’ she turned towards the back of the 
shop and called ‘Ge-orge 1 ’ 

So the other bloke’s name was George too A noise that sounded something 
like ‘Ur 1 ’ came from the back of the shop 

‘Ge-orge* Where ju put that other box of pipes’’ 

George came m He was a small stoutish chap, in shirtsleeves, with a bald 
head and a big gingery-coloured soupstramer moustache His jaw was working 
m a ruminative kind of way Obviously he’d been interrupted in the middle of 
his tea The two of them started poking round m search of the other box of 
pipes. It was about five minutes before they ran it to earth behind some bottles 
of sweets It’s wonderful, the amount of litter they manage to accumulate in 
these frowsy little shops where the whole stock is worth about fifty quid. 

I watched old Elsie poking about among the litter and mumbling to herself 
Do you know the kind of shuffling, round-shouldered movements of an old 
woman who’s lost something’ No use trying to describe to you what I felt A 
kind of cold, deadly desolate feeling You can’t conceive it unless you’ve had it 
All I can say is, if there was a girl you used to care about twenty-five years ago, 
go and have a look at her now Then perhaps you’ll know what I felt 

But as a matter of fact, the thought that was chiefly in my mind was how 
differently things turn out from what you expect The times I’d had with Elsie* 
The |qly aights under the chestnut trees* Wouldn’t you think it would leave 
SOtEHl kind of after-effect behind? Who’d have thought the time would ever 
oo me when there would be j’ust no feeling whatever between us’ Here was I 
JMldtee wasshe, our bodies might be a yard apart, and we were just as much 
strangers though we’d never met As for her, she didn’t even recognize me 



Coming up for Air 555 

If I told her who I was, very likely she wouldn’t remember And if she did 
remember, what would she feeP Just nothing Probably wouldn’t even be 
angry because I’d done the dirty on her It was as if the whole thing had never 
happened 

And on the other hand, who’d ever have foreseen that Elsie would end up 
like tins' 1 She’d seemed the kind of girl who’s bound to go to the devil I know 
there’d been at least one other man before I had met her, and it’s safe to bet 
there were others between me and the second George It wouldn’t surprise me 
to learn that she’d had a dozen altogether I treated her badly, there’s no 
question about that, and many a time it had given me a bad half-hour She’ll 
end up on the streets, I used to think, or stick her head m the gas oven And 
sometimes I felt I’d been a bit of a bastard, but other times I reflected (what 
was true enough) that if it hadn’t been me it would have been somebody else 
But you see the way things happen, the kind of dull pointless way How many 
women really end up on the streets’ A damn sight more end up at the mangle 
She hadn’t gone to the bad, or to the good either Just ended up like everybody 
else, a fat old woman muddling about a frowsy little shop, with a gmgery- 
moustached George to call her own Probably got a string of kids as well Mrs 
George Cookson Lived respected and died lamented-and might die this side 
of the bankruptcy-court, if she was lucky 
They’d found the box of pipes Of course there weren’t any with amber 
mouthpieces among them 

T don’t know as we got any amber ones just at present, sir Not amber We 
gossome nice vulcanite ones ’ 

‘I wanted an amber one,’ I said 

‘We gossome nice pipes ’ere ’ She held one out ‘That’s a nice pipe, now 
’Alf a crown, that one is ’ 

I took it Our fingers touched No kick, no reaction The body doesn’t 
remember. And I suppose you think I bought the pipe, just for old sake’s sake, 
to put half a crown m Elsie’s pocket But not a bit of it I didn’t want the thing 
I don’t smoke a pipe I’d merely been making a pretext to come mto the shop I 
turned it over in my fingers and then put it down on the counter 
‘Doesn’t matter, I’ll leave it,’ I said ‘Give me a small Players’ ’ 

Had to buy something, after all that fuss George the second, or maybe the 
third or fourth, routed out a packet of Players’, still munching away beneath 
his moustache I could see he was sulky because I’d dragged him away from his 
tea for nothing But it seemed too damn silly to waste half a crown I cleared 
out and that was the last I ever saw of Elsie 
I went back to the George and had dinner Afterwards I went out with some 
vague idea of going to the pictures, if they were open, but instead I landed up 
m one of the big noisy pubs in the new part of the town There I ran into a 
couple of chaps from Staffordshire who were travelling m hardware, and we 
got talking about the state of trade, and playing darts and drinking Guinness 
By closing time they were both so boozed that I had to take them home m a 
taxi, and I was a bit under the weather myself, and the next morning X woke up 
with a worse head than even J 



5 


But I had to see the pool at Binfield House 

I felt really bad that morning The fact was that ever since I struck Lower 
Binfield I’d been drinking almost continuously from every opening time to 
every closing time The reason, though it hadn’t occurred to me till this 
minute, was that really there’d been nothing else to do That was all my trip 
had amounted to so far-three days on the booze 

The same as the other morning, I crawled over to the window and watched 
the bowler hats and school caps hustling to and fro My enemies, I thought 
The conquering army that’s sacked the town and covered the ruins with fag- 
ends and paper bags I wondered why I cared You think, I dare say, that if it 
had given me a jolt to find Lower Binfield swollen into a kind of Dagenham, it 
was merely because I don’t like to see the earth getting fuller and country 
turning into town But it isn’t that at all I don’t mind towns growing, so long 
as they do grow and don’t merely spread like gravy over a tablecloth I know 
that people have got to have somewhere to live, and that if a factory isn’t in one 
place it’ll be in another As for the picturesqueness, the sham countrified stuff, 
the oak panels and pewter dishes and copper warming-pans and what-not, it 
merely gives me the sick Whatever we were m the old days, we weren’t 
picturesque Mother would never have seen any sense in the antiques that 
Wendy had filled our house with She didn’t like gateleg tables-she said they 
‘caught your legs’. As for pewter, she wouldn’t have it m the house ‘Nasty 
greasy stuff, she called it. And yet, say what you like, there was something that 
we had in those days and haven’t got now, something that you probably can’t 
have m a streamlined milk-bar with the radio playing I’d come back to look for 
it, and I hadn’t found it And yet somehow I half believe in it even now, when I 
hadn’t yet got my teeth in and my belly was crying out for an aspirin and a cup 
of tea. 

And that started me thinking again about the pool at Binfield House After 
seeing what they’d done to the town. I’d had a feeling you could only describe 
as fear about going to see whether the pool still existed And yet it might, there 
was no knowing. The town was smothered under red brick, our house was full 
of Wendy and her junk, the Thames was poisoned with motor-oil and paper 
bags. Bufmaybe the pool was still there, with the great black fish still cruising 
found it. Maybe, even, it was still hidden m the woods and from that day to 
this no one had discovered it existed It was quite possible It was a very thick 
bit of wood, full of brambles and rotten brushwood (the beech trees gave way 



Coming up for Air $57 

to oaks round about there, which made the undergrowth thicker), the kind of 
place most people don’t care to penetrate Queerer things have happened 

I didn’t start out till late afternoon It must have been about half past four 
when I took the car out and drove on to the Upper Binfield road Half-way up 
the hill the houses thinned out and stopped and the beech trees began The 
road forks about there and I took the right-hand fork, meaning to make a 
detour round and come back to Binfield House on the road. But presently I 
stopped to have a look at the copse I was driving through The beech trees 
seemed just the same Lord, how they were the same* I backed the car on to a 
bit of grass beside the road, under a fall of chalk, and got out and walked Just 
the same The same stillness, the same great beds of rustling leaves that seem 
to go on from year to year without rotting Not a creature stirring except the 
small birds m the tree-tops which you couldn’t see It wasn’t easy to believe 
that that great noisy mess of a town was barely three miles away I began to 
make my way through the little copse, m the direction of Binfield House I 
could vaguely remember how the paths went And Lord' Yes’ The same chalk 
hollow where the Black Hand went and had catapult shots, and Sid Lovegrove 
told us how babies were born, the day I caught my first fish, pretty near forty 
years ago 1 

As the trees thmned out again you could see the other road and the wall of 
Binfield House The old rotting wooden fence was gone, of course, and they’d 
put up a high brick wall with spikes on top, such as you’d expect to see round a 
loony-bin I’d puzzled for some time about how to get into Binfield House 
until finally it had struck me that I’d only to tell them my wife was mad and I 
was looking for somewhere to put her After that they’d be quite ready to show 
me round the grounds In my new suit I probably looked prosperous enough 
to have a wife in a private asylum It wasn’t till I was actually at the gate that it 
occurred to me to wonder whether the pool was still inside the grounds 

The old grounds of Binfield House had covered fifty acres, I suppose, and 
the grounds of the loony-bm weren’t likely to be more than five or ten They 
wouldn’t want a great pool of water for the loonies to drown themselves m 
The lodge, where old Hodges used to live, was the same as ever, but the yellow 
brick wall and the huge iron gates were new From the glimpse I got through 
the gates I wouldn’t have known the place Gravel walks, flower-beds, lawns, 
and a few aimless-lookmg types wandering about-loomes, I suppose I 
strolled up the road to the right The pool-the big pool, the one where I used 
to fish- was a couple of hundred yards behind the house It might have been a 
hundred yards before I got to the corner of the wall So the pool was outside 
the grounds. The trees seemed to have got much thinner I could hear 
children’s voices And Gosh 1 there was the pool 

I stood for a moment, wondering what had happened to it Then I saw what 
it was-all the trees were gone from round its edge It looked all bare and 
different, m fact it looked extraordinarily like the Round Pond in Kensington 
Gardens Kids wre playing all round the edge, sailing boats and paddling, and 
a few rather older kids were rushing about m those little canoes which you 
work by turning a handle. Over to the left, where the old rotting boat-house 



5 Coming up for Air 

used to stand among the reeds, there was a sort of pavilion and a sweet kiosk, 
and a huge white notice saying upper binfield model yacht club 
I looked over to the right It was all houses, houses, houses One might as 
well have been in the outer suburbs All the woods that used to grow beyond 
the pool, and grew so thick that they were like a kind of tropical jungle, had 
been shaved flat Only a few clumps of trees still standing round the houses 
There were arty-lookmg houses, another of those sham-Tudor colonies like 
the one I'd seenlhe first day at the top of Chamford Hill, only more so What a 
fool I'd been to imagine that these woods were still the samel I saw how it was 
There was just the one tiny bit of copse, half a dozen acres perhaps, that hadn’t 
been cut down, and it was pure chance that I'd walked through it on my way 
here Upper Binfield, which had been merely a name m the old days, had 
grown into a decent-sized town In fact it was merely an outlying chunk of 
Lower Binfield 

I wandered up to the edge of the pool The kids were splashing about and 
making the devil of a noise There seemed to be swarms of them The water 
looked kind of dead No fish in it now There was a chap standing watching the 
kids He was an oldish chap with a bald head and a few tufts of white hair, and 
pince-nez and very sunburnt face There was something vaguely queer about 
his appearance He was wearing shorts and sandals and one of those celanese 
shirts open at the neck, I noticed, but what really struck me was the look in his 
eye He had very blue eyes that kind of twinkled at you from behind his 
spectacles I could see that he was one of those old men who’ve never grown 
up They’re always either health-food cranks or else they have something to do 
with the Boy Scouts-in either case they’re great ones for Nature and the open 
air He was looking at me as if he’d like to speak 
‘Upper Bmfield’s grown a great deal,’ I said 
He twinkled at me 

‘Grown 1 My dear sir, we never allow Upper Binfield to grow We pride 
ourselves on being rather exceptional people up here, you know Just a little 
colony of us all by ourselves No mterlopers-te-heei’ 

‘I mean compared with before the war,’ I said ‘I used to live here as a boy ’ 
‘Oh-ah No doubt That was before my time, of course. But the Upper 
Binfield Estate is something rather special in the way of building estates, you 
know Quite a little world of its own All designed by young Edward Watkm, 
the architect You’ve heard of him, of course We live in the midst of Nature up 
here No connexion with the town down there’-he waved a hand in the 
direction of Lower Bmfield-‘the dark satanic mills-te-hee 1 ’ 

He had a benevolent old chuckle, and a way of wrinkling his face up, like a 
rabbit. Immediately, as though Pd asked him, he began telling me all about the 
"Upper- Bmfield Estate and young Edward Watkm, the architect, who had such 
a feeing for the Tudor, and was such a wonderful fellow at finding genuine 
Bfeabethan beams in old farmhouses and buying them at ridiculous prices 
Afid such an interesting young fellow, quite the life and soul of the nudist 
ipardba* He repeated a number of times that they were very exceptional people 
in Binfield, quite different from Lower Binfield, they were determined 



Coming up for Air 5 59 

to enrich the countryside instead of defiling it (I’m using his own phrase), and 
there weren’t any public houses on the estate 

‘They talk of their Garden Cities But we call Upper Bmfield the Woodland 
City-te-hee' Nature'’ He waved a hand at what was left of the trees ‘The 
primeval forest brooding round us Our young people grow up amid 
surroundings of natural beauty We are nearly all of us enlightened people, of 
course Would you credit that three-quarters of us up here are vegetarians? 
The local butchers don’t like us at all-te-hee' And some quite eminent people 
live here Miss Helena Thurloe, the novelist-you’ve heard of her, of course 
And Professor Woad, the psychic research worker Such a poetic character 1 He 
goes wandering out into the woods and the family can’t find him at mealtimes 
He says he’s walking among the fairies Do you believe in fairies? I admit-te- 
hee'-I am just a wee bit sceptical But his photographs are most convincing ’ 
I began to wonder whether he was someone who’d escaped from Bmfield 
House But no, he was sane enough, after a fashion I knew the type 
Vegetarianism, simple life, poetry, nature-worship, roll m the dew before 
breakfast I’d met a few of them years ago m Ealing. He began to show me 
round the estate There was nothing left of the woods It was all houses, 
houses-and what houses' Do you know these faked-up Tudor houses with the 
curly roofs and the buttresses that don’t buttress anything, and the rock- 
gardens with concrete bird-baths and those red plaster elves you can buy at the 
florists’? You could see m your mind’s eye the awful gang of food-cranks and 
spook-hunters and simple-lifers with £1,000 a year that lived there Even the 
pavements were crazy I didn’t let him take me far Some of the houses made 
me wish I’d got a hand-grenade in my pocket I tried to damp him down by 
asking whether people didn’t object to living so near the lunatic asylum, but it 
didn’t have much effect Finally I stopped and said 
‘There used to be another pool, besides the big one It can’t be far from 
here ’ 

‘Another pool? Oh, surely not I don’t think there was ever another pool ’ 
‘They may have drained it off,’ I said ‘It was a pretty deep pool It would 
leave a big pit behind ’ 

For the first time he looked a bit uneasy He rubbed his nose 
‘Oh-ah Of course, you must understand our life up here is in some ways 
primitive The simple life, you know We prefer it so But being so far from the 
town has its inconveniences, of course Some of our sanitary arrangements are 
not altogether satisfactory The dust-cart only calls once a month, I believe ’ 
‘You mean they’ve turned the pool into a rubbish-dump?’ 

‘Well, there is something in the nature of a-’ he shied at the word rubbish- 
dump ‘We have to dispose of tins and so forth, of course Over there, behind 
that clump of trees ’ 

We went across there They’d left a few trees to hid it But yes, there it was. 
It was my pool, all right. They’d drained the water off. It made a great round 
hole, like an enormous well, twenty or thirty feet deep Already it was half full 
of tin cans. 

I- stood looking: at the tin cans 



j6o Coming up for Air 

‘It’s a pity they drained it,’ I said ‘There used to be some big fish in that 
pool ’ 

‘Fish’ Oh, I never heard anything about that Of course we could hardly 
have a pool of water here among the houses The mosquitoes, you know But it 
was before my time ’ 

‘I suppose these houses have been built a good long time’’ I said 
‘Oh-ten or fifteen years, I think ’ 

‘I used to know this place before the war ’ I said ‘It was all woods then 
There weren’t any houses except Binfield House But that little bit of copse 
over there hasn’t changed I walked through it on my way here ’ 

‘Ah, that f That is sacrosanct We have decided never to build m it It is 
sacred to the young people Nature, you know ’ He twinkled at me, a kind of 
roguish look, as if he was letting me into a little secret ‘We call it the Pixy 
Glen’ 

The Pixy Glen I got rid of him, went back to the car and drove down to 
Lower Binfield The Pixy Glen And they’d filled my pool up with tin cans 
God rot them and bust them 1 Say what you like-call it silly, childish, 
anythmg-but doesn’t it make you puke sometimes to see what they’re doing to 
England, with their bird-baths and their plaster gnomes, and their pixies and 
tm cans, where the beech woods used to be’ 

Sentimental, you say’ Anti-social’ Oughtn’t to prefer trees to men’ I say it 
depends what trees and what men Not that there’s anything one can do about 
it, except to wish them the pox in their guts 
One thing, I thought as I drove down the hill, I’m finished with this notion 
of getting back into the past What’s the good of trying to revisit the scenes of 
yopr boyhood’ They don’t exist Coming up for air 1 But there isn’t any air 
The dustbin that we’re m reaches up to the stratosphere All the same, I didn’t 
particularly care After all, I thought, I’ve still got three days left I’d have a bit 
of peace and quiet, and stop bothering about what they’d done to Lower 
Binfield As for my idea of going fishing-that was off, of course Fishing, 
indeed 1 At my age 1 Really, Hilda was right 
I dumped the car in the garage of the George and walked into the lounge It 
was six o’clock Somebody had switched on the wireless and the news- 
broadcast was beginning I came through the door just in time to hear the last 
few words of an S O.S And it gave me a bit of a jolt, I admit For the words I 
heard were 

‘-where his wife, Hilda Bowling, is seriously ill ’ 

The next instant the plummy voice went on. ‘Here is another SOS Will 
Percival Chute, who was last heard of-’, but I didn’t wait to hear any more I 
just miked straight on. What made me feel rather proud, when I thought it 
over afterwards, was that when I heard those words come out of the 
loudspeaker I never turned an eyelash Not even a pause in my step to let 
anyone, know that % was George Bowling, whose wife Hilda Bowling was 
apdously ih. The landlord’s wife was in the lounge, and she knew my name was 
Bowing, at any rate she’d seen it in the register Otherwise there was nobody 
there except a couple of chaps who were staying at the George and who didn’t 



Coming up for Air 5 6 1 

know me from Adam But I kept my head Not a sign to anyone I merely 
walked on into the private bar, which had just opened, and ordered my pint as 
usual 

I had to think it over By the time I’d drunk about half the pint I began to get 
the bearings of the situation In the first place, Hilda wasn't ill, seriously or 
otherwise I knew that She’d been perfectly well when I came away, and it 
wasn’t the time of the year for ’flu or anything of that kind She was sh am ming 
Why? 

Obviously it was just another of her dodges I saw how it was She’d got 
wind somehow- trust Hilda 1 -that I wasn’t really at Birmingham, and this was 
just her way of getting me home Couldn’t bear to think of me any longer with 
that other woman Because of course she’d take it for granted that I was with a 
woman Can’t imagine any other motive And naturally she assumed that I’d 
come rushing home as soon as I heard she was ill 

But that’s just where you’ve got it wrong, I thought to myself as I finished 
off the pint I’m too cute to be caught that way I remembered the dodges she’d 
pulled before, and the extraordinary trouble she’ll take to catch me out I’ve 
even known her, when I’d been on some journey she was suspicious about, 
check it all up with a Bradshaw and a road-map, just to see whether I was 
telling the truth about my movements And then there was that time when she 
followed me all the way to Colchester and suddenly burst in on me at the 
Temperance Hotel And that time, unfortunately, she happened to be nght-at 
least, she wasn’t, but there were circumstances which made it look as if she 
was I hadn’t the slightest belief that she was ill In fact, I knew she wasn’t, 
although I couldn’t say exactly how, 

I had another pint and things looked better Of course there was a row 
coming when I got home, but there’d have been a row anyway I’ve got three 
good days ahead of me, I thought Curiously enough, now that the things I’d 
come to look for had turned out not to exist, the idea of having a bit of holiday 
appealed to me all the more Being away from home-that was the great thing 
Peace perfect peace with loved ones far away, as the hymn puts it And 
suddenly I decided that I would have a woman if I felt like it It would serve 
Hilda right for being so dirty-mmded, and besides, where’s the sense of being 
suspected if it isn’t true? 

But as the second pint worked inside me, the thing began to amuse me, I 
hadn’t fallen for it, but it was damned ingenious all the same I wondered how 
she’d managed about the S O S I’ve no idea what the procedure is Do you 
have to have a doctor’s certificate, or do you just send your name in? I felt 
pretty sure it was the Wheeler woman who’d put her up to it. It seemed to me 
to have the Wheeler touch. 

But all the same, the cheek of it r The lengths that women will go* Sometimes 
you can’t help kind of admiring them 



6 


After breakfast I strolled out into the market-place It was a lovely morning, 
kind of cool and still, with a pale yellow light like white wine playing over 
everything The fresh smell of the morning was mixed up with the smell of my 
cigar But there was a zooming noise from behind the houses, and suddenly a 
fleet of great black bombers came whizzing over I looked up at them They 
seemed to be bang overhead 

The next moment I heard something And at the same moment, if you’d 
happened to be there, you’d have seen an interesting instance of what I believe 
is called conditioned reflex Because what I’d heard-there wasn’t any question 
of mistake-was the whistle of a bomb I hadn’t heard such a thing for twenty 
years, but I didn’t need to be told what it was And without taking any kind of 
thought I did the right thing I flung myself on my face 

After all I’m glad you didn’t see me I don’t suppose I looked dignified. I 
was flattened out on the pavement like a rat when it squeezes under a door 
Nobody else had been half as prompt I’d acted so quickly that m the split 
second while the bomb was whistling down I even had time to be afraid that it 
was all a mistake and I’d made a fool of myself for nothing 

But the next moment-ah 1 

BOOM-BRRRRRI 

A noise like the Day of Judgment, and then a noise like a ton of coal falling 
on to a sheet of tin. That was falling bricks I seemed to kind of melt into the 
pavement Tt’s started,’ I thought ‘I knew it 1 Old Hitler didn’t wait Just sent 
his bombers across without warning ’ 

And yet here’s a peculiar thing. Even in the echo of that awful, deafening 
crash, which seemed to freeze me up from top to toe, I had time to think that 
there’s something grand about the bursting of a big projectile What does it 
sound like> It’s hard to say, because what you hear is mixed up with what 
you’re frightened of Mainly it gives you a vision of bursting metal You seem 
to see great sheets of iron bursting open. But the peculiar thing is the feeling it 
gives you of being suddenly shoved up against reality It’s like being woken up 
by somebody shying a bucket of water over you You’re suddenly dragged out 
of your dreams by a dang of bursting metal, and it’s terrible, and it’s real 
- There was a sound of screams and yells, and also of car brakes being 
suddenly jammed on The second bomb which I was waiting for didn’t fall I 
raised my head a little. On every side people seemed to be rushmg round and 
streaming. A car was skidding diagonally across the road, I 'could hear a 



Coming up for Air 563 

woman’s voice shrieking., ‘The Germans 1 The Germans 1 ’ To the right I had a 
vague impression of a man’s round white face, rather like a wrinkled paper bag, 
looking down at me He was kind of dithering 

‘What is rt? What’s happened^ What are they domg>’ 

‘It’s started,’ I said ‘That was a bomb Lie down ’ 

But still the second bomb didn’t fall Another quarter of a minute or so, and 
I raised my head again Some of the people were still rushing about, others 
were standing as if they’d been glued to the ground From somewhere behmd 
the houses a huge haze of dust had risen up, and through it a black jet of smoke 
was streaming upwards And then I saw an extraordinary sight At the other 
end of the market-place the High Street rises a little And down this little hill a 
herd of pigs was galloping, a sort of huge flood of pig-faces The next moment, 
of course, I saw what it was It wasn’t pigs at all, it was only the schoolchildren 
in their gas-masks I suppose they were bolting for some cellar where they’d 
been told to take cover m case of air-raids At the back of them I could even 
make out a taller pig who was probably Miss Todgers But I tell you for a 
moment they looked exactly like a herd of pigs 

I picked myself up and walked across the market-place People were calming 
down already, and quite a little crowd had begun to flock towards the place 
where the bomb had dropped 

Oh, yes, you’re right, of course It wasn’t a German aeroplane after all The 
war hadn’t broken out It was only an accident The planes were flying over to 
do a bit of bombing practice-at any rate they were carrying bombs-and 
somebody had put his hands on the lever by mistake I expect he got a good 
ticking off for it By the time that the postmaster had rung up London to ask 
whether there was a war on, and been told that there wasn’t, everyone had 
grasped that it was an accident But there’d been a space of time, something 
between a minute and five minutes, when several thousand people believed we 
were at war A good job it didn’t last any longer Another quarter of an hour 
and we’d have been lynching our first spy 

I followed the crowd The bomb had dropped m a little side-street off the 
High Street, the one where Uncle Ezekiel used to have his shop. It wasn’t fifty 
yards from where the shop used to be. As I came round the corner I could hear 
voices murmuring ‘Oo-oo , ’-a kind of awed noise, as if they were frightened 
and getting a big kick out of it Luckily I got there a few minutes before the 
ambulance and the fire-engine, and in spite of the fifty people or so that had 
already collected I saw everything. 

At first sight it looked as if the sky had been raining bricks and vegetables 
There were cabbage leaves everywhere The bomb had blown a greengrocer’s 
shop out of existence The house to the right of it had part of its roof blown off, 
and the roof beams were on fire, and all the houses round had been more or less 
damaged and had their windows smashed. But what everyone was looking at 
was the house on the left Its wall, the one that joined the greengrocer’s shop, 
was ripped off as neatly as if someone had done it with a knife And what was 
extraordinary was that in the upstairs rooms nothing had been touched It was 
just like looking into a doll’s house Chests-of-drawers, bedroom chairs, faded 



364 Coming up for Air 

wallpaper, a bed not yet made, and a jerry under the bed-all exactly as it had 
been lived in, except that one wall was gone But the lower rooms had caught 
the force of the explosion There was a frightful smashed-up mess of bricks, 
plaster, chair-legs, bits of a varnished dresser, rags of tablecloth, piles of 
broken plates, and chunks of a scullery sink A jar of marmalade had rolled 
across the floor, leaving a long streak of marmalade behind, and running side 
by side with it there was a ribbon of blood But m among the broken crockery 
there was lying a leg Just a leg, with the trouser still on it and a black boot with 
a Wood-Milne rubber heel This was what people were oo-ing and ah-mg at 

I had a good look at it and took it in The blood was beginmng to get mixed 
up with the marmalade When the fire-engine arrived I cleared off to the 
George to pack my bag 

This finishes me with Lower Binfield, I thought I’m going home But as a 
matter of fact I didn’t shake the dust off my shoes and leave immediately One 
never does When anything like that happens, people always stand about and 
discuss it for hours There wasn’t much work done m the old part of Lower 
Binfield that day, everyone was too busy talking about the bomb, what it 
sounded like and what they thought when they heard it The barmaid at the 
George said it fair gave her the shudders She said she’d never sleep sound m 
her bed again, and what did you expect, it just showed that with these here 
bombs you never knew A woman had bitten off part of her tongue owing to the 
jump the explosion gave her It turned out that whereas at our end of the town 
everyone had imagined it was a German air-raid, everyone at the other end had 
taken it for granted that it was an explosion at the stocking factory Afterwards 
(I got this out of the newspaper) the Air Ministry sent a chap to inspect the 
damage, and issued a report saying that the effects of the bomb were 
‘disappointing’ As a matter of fact it only killed three people, the greengrocer, 
Perrott his name was, and an old couple who lived next door The woman 
wasn’t much smashed about, and they identified the old man by his boots, but 
they never found a trace of Perrott Not even a trouser-button to read the 
burial service over 

In the afternoon I paid my bill and hooked it I didn’t have much more than 
three quid left after I’d paid the bill, They know how to cut it out of you 1 these 
dolled-up country hotels, and what with drinks and other odds and ends I’d 
been shying money about pretty freely I left my new rod and the rest of the 
fishing tackle in my bedroom Let ’em keep it No use to me It was merely a 
quid that I’d chucked down the drain to teach myself a lesson And I’d learnt 
the lesson all right Fat men of forty-five can’t go fishing That kind of thing 
doesn’t happen any longer, it’s just a dream, there’ll be no more fishing this 
side of the grave. 

It’s funny how things sink into you by degrees. What had I really felt when 
thehomb exploded? At the actual moment, of course, it scared the wits out of 
®% and when I saw the smashed-up house and the old man’s leg I’d had the 
kind of mild kick that you get from seeing a street-accident Disgusting, of 
now®. Quite enough to make me fed-up with this so-called holiday But it 
hadn’t really made much impression 



Coming up for Air $6$ 

But as I got clear of the outskirts of Lower Bmfield and turned the car 
eastward, it all came back to me Y ou know how it is when you’re in a car alone 
There’s something either m the hedges flying past you, or m the throb of the 
engine, that gets your thoughts running m a certain rhythm You have the 
same feeling sometimes when you’re in the train It’s a feeling of being able to 
see things in better perspective than usual All kinds of things that I’d been 
doubtful about I felt certain about now To begin with, I’d come to Lower 
Bmfield with a question m my mind What’s ahead of us? Is the game really 
up? Can we get back to the life we used to live, or is it gone for ever? Well, I’d 
had my answer The old life’s finished, and to go back to Lower Bmfield, you 
can’t put Jonah back into the whale I knew , though I don’t expect you to 
follow my tram of thought And it was a queer thing I’d done coming here All 
those years Lower Bmfield had been tucked away somewhere or other in my 
mind, a sort of quiet corner that I could step back into when I felt like it, and 
finally I’d stepped back into it and found that it didn’t exist I’d chucked a 
pineapple into my dreams, and lest there should be any mistake the Royal Air 
Force had followed up with five hundred pounds of T N T 

War is coming 1941, they say And there’ll be plenty of broken crockery, 
and little houses ripped open like packing-cases, and the guts of the chartered 
accountant’s clerk plastered over the piano that he’s buying on the never- 
never But what does that kind of thing matter, anyway? I’ll tell you what my 
stay m Lower Bmfield had taught me, and it was this It’s all going to happen 
All the things you’ve got at the back of your mind, the things you’re terrified 
of, the things that you tell yourself are just a nightmare or only happen m 
foreign countries The bombs, the food-queues, the rubber truncheons, the 
barbed wire, the coloured shirts, the slogans, the enormous faces, the machine- 
guns squirting out of bedroom windows. It’s all going to happen I know lt-at 
any rate, I knew it then There’s no escape Fight against it if you like, or look 
the other way and pretend not to notice, or grab your spanner and rush out to 
do a bit of face-smashing along with the others But there’s no way out It’s just 
something that’s got to happen 

I trod on the gas, and the old car whizzed up and down the little hills, and the 
cows and elm trees and fields of wheat rushed past till the engme was pretty 
nearly red-hot I felt m much the same mood as I’d felt that day m January 
when I was coming down the Strand, the day I got my new false teeth It was as 
though the power of prophecy had been given me It seemed to me that I could 
see the whole of England, and all the people m it, and all the things that’ll 
happen to all of them Sometimes, of course, even then, I had a doubt or two 
The world is very large, that’s a thing you notice when you’re driving about m 
a car, and in a way it’s reassuring Think of the enormous stretches of land you 
pass over when you cross a corner of a single English county It’s like Siberia 
And the fields and beech spinneys and farmhouses and churches, and the 
villages with their little grocers’ shops and the parish hall and the ducks 
walking across the green Surely it’s too big to be changed? Bound to remain 
more or less the same And presently I struck mto outer London and followed 
the Uxbridge Road as far as Southall Miles and miles of ugly houses, with 



j<5<5 Coming up for Air 

people living dull decent lives inside them And beyond it London stretching 
on and on, streets, squares, back-alleys, tenements, blocks of flats, pubs, fried- 
fish shops, picture-houses, on and on for twenty miles, and all the eight million 
people with their little private lives which they don’t want to have altered The 
bombs aren’t made that could smash it out of existence And the chaos of it' 
The privateness of all those lives' John Smith cutting out the football coupons. 
Bill Williams swapping stories in the barber’s Mrs Jones coming home with 
the supper beer Eight million of them' Surely they’ll manage somehow, 
bombs or no bombs, to keep on with the life that they’ve been used to> 
Illusion* Baloney* It doesn’t matter how many of them there are, they’re all 
for it The bad times are coming, and the streamlined men are coming too 
What’s coming afterwards I don’t know, it hardly even interests me I only 
know that if there’s anything you care a curse about, better say good-bye to it 
now, because everything you’ve ever known is going down, down, into the 
muck, with the machme-guns rattling all the time 
But when I got back to the suburb my mood suddenly changed 
It suddenly struck me-and it hadn’t even crossed my mind till that 
moment-that Hilda might really be ill after all 
That’s the effect of environment, you see In Lower Binfield I’d taken it 
absolutely for granted that she wasn’t ill and was merely shamming m order to 
get me home. It had seemed natural at the time, I don’t know why But as I 
drove into West Bletchley and the Hespendes Estate closed round me like a 
kind of red-brick prison, which is what it is, the ordinary habits of thought 
came back I had this kind of Monday morning feeling when everything seems 
bleak and sensible I saw what bloody rot it was, this business that I’d wasted 
the last five days on Sneaking off to Lower Binfield to try and recover the past, 
and then, m the car coming home, thinking a lot of prophetic baloney about the 
future The future* What’s the future got to do with chaps like you and me ? 
Holding down our jobs-that’s our future As for Hilda, even when the bombs 
are dropping she’ll be still thinking about the price of butter 
And suddenly I saw what a fool I’d been to think she’d do a thing like that 
Of course the SOS wasn’t a fake* As though she’d have the imagination* It 
was just the plain cold truth She wasn’t shamming at all, she was really ill 
And Gosh* at this moment she might be lying somewhere mgh^t|ypaini or 
even dead, for all I knew The thought sent a most horrfMe*#ahg of fright 
through me, a sort of dreadful cold feeling in my guts I whizzed down 
Ellesmere Road at nearly forty miles an hour, and instead of taking the car to 
the lock-up garage as usual I stopped outside the house and jumped out 
So I’m fond of Hilda after all, you say 1 1 don’t know exactly what you mean 
by fond. Are you fond of your own face’ Probably not, but you can’t imagine 
yourself without it. It’s part of you. Well, that’s how I felt about Hilda When 
things are going weh I can’t stick the sight of her, but the thought that she 



Coming up for Air 567 

No answer For a moment I was yelling ‘Hilda 1 Hilda*’ into utter silence, and 
some cold sweat started out on my backbone Maybe they carted her away to 
hospital already-maybe there was a corpse lying upstairs m the empty house 
I started to dash up the stairs, but at the same moment the two kids, in their 
pyjamas, came out of their rooms on either side of the landing It was eight or 
nine o’clock, I suppose-at any rate the light was just beginmng to fail Lorna 
hung over the banisters 

‘Oo, Daddy* Oo, it’s Daddy* Why have you come back today? Mummy said 
you weren’t coming till Friday ’ 

‘Where’s your mother?’ I said 

‘Mummy’s out She went out with Mrs Wheeler Why have you come home 
today. Daddy?’ 

‘Then your mother hasn’t been ill?’ 

‘No Who said she’d been ill? Daddy* Have you been m Birmingham?’ 

‘Yes Get back to bed, now You’ll be catching cold ’ 

‘But where’s our presents. Daddy?’ 

‘What presents?’ 

‘The presents you’ve bought us from Birmingham ’ 

‘You’ll see them in the morning,’ I said 
‘Oo, Daddy* Can’t we see them tonight?’ 

‘No Dry up Get back to bed or I’ll wallop the pair of you ’ 

So she wasn’t ill after all She had been shamming And really I hardly knew 
whether to be glad or sorry I turned back to the front door, which I’d left 
open, and there, as large as life, was Hilda coming up the garden path 

I looked at her as she came towards me m the last of the evening light It was 
queer to think that less than three minutes earlier I’d been in the devil of a 
stew, with actual cold sweat on my backbone, at the thought that she might be 
dead Well, she wasn’t dead, she was just as usual Old Hilda with her thin 
shoulders and her anxious face, and the gas bill and the school-fees, and the 
mackmtoshy smell and the office on Monday-all the bedrock facts that you 
invariably come back to, the eternal verities as old Porteous calls them I could 
see that Hilda wasn’t m too good a temper She darted me a little quick look, 
like she does sometimes when she’s got something on her mmd, the kind of 
look some little thin animal, a weasel for instance, might give you She didn’t 
seem surprised to see me back, however, 

‘Oh, so you’re back already, are you?’ she said 

It seemed pretty obvious that I was back, and I didn’t answer She didn’t 
make any move to kiss me 

‘There’s nothing for your supper,’ she went on promptly That’s Hilda all 
over Always manages to say something depressing the instant you set foot 
inside the house. ‘I wasn’t expecting you You’ll just have to have bread and 
cheese-but I don’t think we’ve got any cheese ’ 

I followed her indoors, into the smell of mackintoshes We went into the 
sitting-room I shut the door and switched on the light, I meant to get my say 
m first, and I knew it would make things better if I took a strong line from the 
start 



$68 Coming up for Air 

‘Now’, I said, ‘what the bloody hell do yon mean by playing that trick on me 5 ’ 
She’d just laid her bag down on top of the radio, and for a moment she 
looked genuinely surprised 
‘What trick 5 What do you mean 5 ’ 

‘Sending out that SOS 1 ’ 

‘What SOS 5 What are you talking about, George 5 ’ 

‘Are you trying to tell me you didn’t get them to send out an S O S saying 
you were seriously ill 5 ’ 

‘Of course I didn’t ! How could I 5 I wasn’t ill What would I do a thing like 
that for 5 ’ 

I began to explain, but almost before I began I saw what had happened It 
was all a mistake I’d only heard the last few words of the S O S and obviously 
it was some other Hilda Bowling I suppose there’d be scores of Hilda 
Bowlings if you looked the name up in the directory It just was the kind of dull 
stupid mistake that’s always happening Hilda hadn’t even showed that little 
bit of imagination I’d credited her with The sole mterest m the whole affair 
had been the five mmutes or so when I thought she was dead, and found that I 
cared after all But that was over and done with While I explained she was 
watching me, and I could see m her eye that there was trouble of some kind 
coming And then she began questioning me in what I call her third-degree 
voice, which isn’t, as you might expect, angry and nagging, but quiet and kind 
of watchful 

‘So you heard this S O S in the hotel at Birmingham 5 ’ 

‘Yes Last night, on the National Broadcast ’ 

‘When did you leave Birmingham, then?’ 

‘This morning, of course ’ (I’d planned out the journey in my mind, just in 
case there should be any need to lie my way out of it Left at ten, lunch at 
Coventry, tea at Bedford-I’d got it all mapped out ) 

‘So you thought last night I was seriously ill, and you didn’t even leave till 
this morning?’ 

‘But I tell you I didn’t think you were ill. Haven’t I explained 5 I thought it 
was just another of your tricks It sounded a damn sight more likely ’ 

‘Then I’m rather surprised you left at all*’ she said with so much vinegar in 
her voice that I knew there was something more coming* But she went^hmore 
quietly ‘So you left this morning, did you 5 ’ 

‘Yes I left about ten I had lunch at Coventry-’ 

‘Then how do you account for this? she suddenly shot out at me, and in the 
same instant she ripped her bag open, took out a piece of paper, and held it out 
as if it had been a forged cheque, or something 
I felt as If someone had hit me a sock m the wind I might have known it 1 
She’d cat^ht me after all. And there was the evidence, the dossier of the case. I 
didn’t even know what it was, except that it was something that proved I’d 
%&en off With a woman. All the stuffing went out of me A moment earlier I’d 
been Idaddf bullying her, making out to be angry because I’d been dragged 
b^dkib^Birttingham for nothing, and now she’d suddenly turned the tables 
Onme*i You don’t lwve to tell me what I look like at that moment. I know. Guilt 



Coming up for Air 569 

written all over me m big letters-I know And I wasn’t even guilty 1 But it’s a 
matter of habit I’m used to being m the wrong For a hundred quid I couldn’t 
have kept the guilt out of my voice as I answered 

‘What do you mean? What’s that thing you’ve got there?’ 

‘You read it and you’ll see what it is ’ 

I took it It was a letter from what seemed to be a firm of solicitors, and it was 
addressed from the same street as Rowbottom’s Hotel, I noticed 
‘Dear Madam,’ I read, ‘With reference to your letter of the 18th mst , we 
think there must be some mistake Rowbottom’s Hotel was closed down two 
years ago and has been converted into a block of offices No one answering the 
description of your husband has been here Possibly-’ 

I didn’t read any further Of course I saw it all in a flash I’d been a little bit 
too clever and put my foot m it There was just one faint ray of hope-young 
Saunders might have forgotten to post the letter I’d addressed from 
Rowbottom’s, m which case it was just possible I could brazen it out But 
Hilda soon put the lid on that idea 

‘Well, George, you see what the letter says? The day you left here I wrote to 
Rowbottom’s Hotel-oh, just a little note, asking them whether you’d arrived 
there And you see the answer I got* There isn’t even any such place as 
Rowbottom’s Hotel And the same day, the very same post, I got your letter 
saying you were at the hotel You got someone to post it for you, I suppose 
That was your business in Birmingham 1 ’ 

‘But look here, Hilda* You’ve got all this wrong It isn’t what you think at 
all You don’t understand ’ 

‘Oh, yes, I do, George I understand perfectly ’ 

‘But look here, Hilda-’ 

Wasn’t any use, of course It was a fair cop I couldn’t even meet her eye I 
turned and tried to make for the door 

‘I’ll have to take the car round to the garage,’ I said 
‘Oh, no George* You don’t get out of it like that You’ll stay here and listen 
to what I’ve got to say, please ’ 

‘But, damn it* I’ve got to switch the lights on, haven’t P It’s past lightmg-up 
time You don’t want us to get fined?’ 

At that she let me go, and I went out and switched the car lights on, but 
when I came back she was still standing there like a figure of doom, with the 
two letters, mine and the solicitor’s on the table in front of her I’d got a little of 
my nerve back, and I had another try 
‘Listen, Hilda You’ve got hold of the wrong end of the stick about this 
business I can explain the whole thing ’ 

‘I’m mxt you could explain anything, George The question is whether I’d 
believe you ’ 

‘But you’re just jumping to conclusions* What made you write to these hotel 
people, anyway?’ 

‘It was Mrs Wheeler’s idea And a very good idea too, as it turned out,’ 
‘Oh, Mrs Wheeler, was it? So you don’t mind letting that blasted woman 
into our private affairs?’ * , t 



Sjq Coming up for Air 

‘She didn’t need any letting in It was she who warned me what you were up 
to this week Something seemed to tell her, she said And she was right, you 
see She knows all about you, George She used to have a husband just like 
you ’ 

‘But, Hilda-’ 

I looked at her Her face had gone a kind of white under the surface, the way 
it does when she thinks of me with another woman A woman If only it had 
been true' 

And GoshI what I could see ahead of me 1 You know what it’s like The 
weeks on end of ghastly nagging and sulking, and the catty remarks after you 
think peace has been signed, and the meals always late, and the kids wanting to 
know what it’s all about But what really got me down was the kind of mental 
squalor, the kind of mental atmosphere in which the real reason why I’d gone 
to Lower Bmfield wouldn’t even be conceivable That was what chiefly struck 
me at the moment If I spent a week explaining to Hilda why I’d been to Lower 
Bmfield, she’d never understand And who would understand, here in 
Ellesmere Road? Gosh 1 did I even understand myselP The whole thing 
seemed to be fading out of my mind Why had I gone to Lower Bmfield? Had I 
gone there? In this atmosphere it just seemed meaningless Nothing’s real in 
Ellesmere Road except gas bills, school-fees, boiled cabbage, and the office on 
Monday 

One more try 

‘But look here, Hilda 1 1 know what you think But you’re absolutely wrong 
I swear to you you’re wrong ’ 

‘Oh, no, George If I was wrong why did you have to tell all those lies?’ 

No getting away from that, of course 

I took a pace or two up and down The smell of old mackintoshes was very 
strong Why had I run away like that? Why had I bothered about the future 
and the past, seeing that the future and the past don’t matter? Whatever 
motives I might have had, I could hardly remember them now The old life m 
Lower Bmfield, the war and the after-war, Hitler, Stalm, bombs, machme- 
guns, food-queues, rubber truncheons-it was fading out, all fading out 
Nothing remained except a vulgar low-down row m a smell of old 
mackintoshes 

One last try 

‘Hilda! Just listen to me a minute. Look here, you don’t know where I’ve 
heen all this week, do you? 5 

‘I don’t want to know where you’ve been. I know what you’ve been doing 
That’s quite enough for me,’ 

‘But dash it-’ 

Quite useless, of course. She’d found me guilty and now she was going to tell 
me what she thought of me That might take a couple of hours. And after that 
there was further trouble looming up, because presently it would occur to her 
to wonder where I’d got the money for this trip, and then she’d discover that 
I’d been holding out on her about the seventeen quid Really there was no 
reason why this row shouldn’t go on till three m the morning. No use playing 



Coming up for Air 571 

injured innocence any longer All I wanted was the line of least resistance And 
in my mind I ran over the three possibilities, which were 
A To tell her what Pd really been doing and somehow make her believe me 
B To pull the old gag about losing my memory 
C To let her go on thinking it was a woman, and take my medicine 
But, damn it 1 1 knew which it would have to be 




KEEP THE ASPIDISTRA FLYING 


Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and 
have not money, I am become as a sounding brass, or a 
tinkling cymbal And though I have the gift of prophecy, 
and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, and though 
I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have 
not money, I am nothing And though I bestow all my 
goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be 
burned, and have not money, it profiteth me nothing 
Money suffereth long, and is kind, money envieth not, 
money vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave 
unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, 
thinketh no evil, rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in 
the truth, beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all 
things, endureth all things And now abideth faith, 
hope, money, these three, but the greatest of these is 
money 

i Corinthians xat ( adapted) 



I 


The clock struck half past two In the little office at the back of Mr 
McKechme’s bookshop., Gordon- Gordon Comstock, last member of the 
Comstock family, aged twenty-mne and rather moth-eaten already-lounged 
across the table, pushing a four-penny packet of Player’s Weights open and 
shut with his thumb 

The ding-dong of another, remoter clock-from the Prince of Wales, the 
other side of the street-rippled the stagnant air Gordon made an effort, sat 
upright, and stowed his packet of cigarettes away in his inside pocket He was 
perishing for a smoke However, there were only four cigarettes left Today 
was Wednesday and he had no money commg to him till Friday It would be 
too bloody to be without tobacco tonight as well as all tomorrow 

Bored in advance by tomorrow’s tobaccoless hours, he got up and moved 
towards the door-a small frail figure, with delicate bones and fretful 
movements His coat was out at elbow m the right sleeve and its middle button 
was missing, his ready-made flannel trousers were stained and shapeless Even 
from above you could see that his shoes needed resoling 
The money clinked in his trouser pocket as he got up He knew the precise 
sum that was there. Fivepence halfpenny-twopence halfpenny and a Joey He 
paused, took out the miserable little threepenny-bit, and looked at it Beastly, 
useless thing 1 And bloody fool to have taken it 1 It had happened yesterday, 
when he was buying cigarettes ‘Don’t mind a threepenny-bit, do you, sir?’ the 
little bitch of a shop-girl had chirped And of course he had let her give it him 
‘Oh no, not at all 1 ’ he had said-fool, bloody fool* 

His heart sickened to think that he had only fivepence halfpenny in the 
world, threepence of which couldn’t even be spent Because how can you buy 
anything with a threepenny-bit? It isn’t a com, it’s the answer to a riddle You 
look such a fool when you take it out of your pocket, unless it’s m among a 
whole handful of other coins ‘How much?’ you say ‘Threepence,’ the shop- 
girl says And then you feel all round your pocket and fish out that absurd little 
thing, all by itself, sticking on the end of your finger like a tiddley-wmk The 
shop-girl sniffs. She spots immediately that it’s your last threepence m the 
world. You see her glance quickly at it-she’s wondering whether there’s a 
piece of Christmas pudding still sticking to it. And you stalk out with your 
nose in the air, and can’t ever go to that shop again. No! We won’t spend our 
Joey, Twopence halfpenny left-twopence halfpenny to last till Friday 
This was the lonely after-dinner hour, whenifew or no customers were-to be 



$j8 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

expected He was alone with seven thousand books The small dark room, 
smelling of dust and decayed paper, that gave on the office, was filled to the 
brim with books, mostly aged and unsaleable On the top shelves near the 
ceiling the quarto volumes of extinct encyclopedias slumbered on their sides m 
piles like the tiered coffins in common graves Gordon pushed aside the blue, 
dust-sodden curtains that served as a doorway to the next room This, better 
lighted than the other, contained the lending library It was one of those 
‘twopenny no-deposit’ libraries beloved of book-pmchers No books in it 
except novels, of course And what novels' But that too was a matter of course 
Eight hundred strong, the novels lined the room on three sides ceiling-high, 
row upon row of gaudy oblong backs, as though the walls had been built of 
many-coloured bricks laid upright They were arranged alphabetically Arlen, 
Burroughs, Deeping, Dell, Frankau, Galsworthy, Gibbs, Priestley, Sapper, 
Walpole Gordon eyed them with inert hatred At this moment he hated all 
books, and novels most of all Horrible to think of all that soggy, half-baked 
trash massed together m one place Pudding, suet pudding Eight hundred 
slabs of pudding, walling him m-a vault of puddmgstone The thought was 
oppressive He moved on through the open doorway into the front part of the 
shop In doing so, he smoothed his hair It was an habitual movement After 
all, there might be girls outside the glass door Gordon was not impressive to 
look at. He was just five feet seven inches high, and because his hair was 
usually too long he gave the impression that his head was a little too big for his 
body He was never quite unconscious of his small stature When he knew that 
anyone was looking at him he earned himself very upright, throwing a chest, 
with a you-be-damned air which occasionally deceived simple people. 
However, there was nobody outside The front room, unlike the rest of the 
shop, was smart and expensive-looking, and it contained about two thousand 
books, exclusive of those m the window On the right there was a glass show- 
case in which children’s books were kept Gordon averted his eyes from a 
beastly Rackhamesque dust-jacket, elvish children tripping Wendily through 
a bluebell glade He gazed out through the glass door A foul day, and the wind 
rising The sky was leaden, the cobbles of the street were slimy It was St 
Andrew’s day, the thirtieth of November McKechme’s stood on a corner, on a 
sort of shapeless square where four streets converged To the left, just within 
sight from the door, stood a great elm-tree, leafless now, its multitudinous 
twigs making sepia-coloured lace against the sky Opposite, next to the Prince 
of Wales, were tall hoardings covered with ads for patent foods and patent 
medicines. A gallery of monstrous doll-faces -pink vacuous faces, full of goofy 
optimism. Q.T Sauce, Truweet Breakfast Crisps (‘Kiddies clamour for their 
Ikeakfast Crisps’), Kangaroo Burgundy, Vitamalt Chocolate, Bovex Of them 
aBU the Bovex one oppressed Gordon the most, A spectacled rat-faced clerk, 
with pateaf-leather hair, sitting at a cafe table grinning over a white mug of 
Bovex. ‘Comer Table enjoys his meal with Bovex’, the legend ran 
Gordon shortened the focus of his eyes. From the dust-dulled pane the 
reflection of his own face looked back at him Not a good face. Not thirty yet, 
bat inpth-eaten already . Very pale, with bitter, ineradicable lines What people 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 579 

call a ‘good’ forehead-high, that ls-but a small pointed chin, so that the face as 
a whole was pear-shaped rather than oval Hair mouse-coloured and unkempt, 
mouth unamiable, eyes hazel inclining to green He lengthened the focus of his 
eyes again He hated mirrors nowadays Outside, all was bleak and wintry A 
tram, like a raucous swan of steel, glided groaning over the cobbles, and m its 
wake the wind swept a debris of trampled leaves The twigs of the elm-tree 
were swirling, straimng eastward The poster that advertised Q T Sauce was 
torn at the edge, a ribbon of paper fluttered fitfully like a tiny pennant In the 
side street too, to the right, the naked poplars that lined the pavement bowed 
sharply as the wind caught them A nasty raw wind There was a threatening 
note in it as it swept over, the first growl of winter’s anger Two lines of a poem 
struggled for birth in Gordon’s mind 
Sharply the something wmd-for instance, threatening wind’ No, better, 
menacing wind The menacing wind blows over-no, sweeps over, say 
The something poplars-yieldmg poplars’ No, better, bending poplars 
Assonance between bending and menacing’ No matter The bending poplars, 
newly bare Good 


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over 
The bending poplars, newly bare 

Good ‘Bare’ is a sod to rhyme, however, there’s always ‘air’, which every 
poet since Chaucer has been struggling to find rhymes for But the impulse 
died away in Gordon’s mmd He turned the money over in his pocket 
Twopence halfpenny and a Joey-twopence halfpenny His mind was sticky 
with boredom He couldn’t cope with rhymes and adjectives You can’t, with 
only twopence halfpenny in your pocket 
His eyes refocused themselves upon the posters opposite He had his private 
reasons for hating them Mechanically he re-read their slogans ‘Kangaroo 
Burgundy-the wine for Britons ’ ‘Asthma was choking her 1 ’ ‘Q T Sauce 
Keeps Hubby Smiling ’ ‘Hike all day on a Slab of Vitamalt 1 ’ ‘Curve Cut-the 
Smoke for Outdoor Men ’ ‘Kiddies clamour for their Breakfast Crisps ’ 
‘Corner Table enjoys his meal with Bovex ’ 

Ha 1 A customer-potential, at any rate Gordon stiffened himself Standing 
by the door, you could get an oblique view out of the front window without 
being seen yourself He looked the potential customer over 
A decentish middle-aged man, black suit, bowler hat, umbrella, and 
dispatch-case-provmcial solicitor or Town Clerk-keeking at the window with 
large pale-coloured eyes He wore a guilty look, Gordon followed the direction 
of his eyes Ah 1 So that was it f He had nosed out those D H Lawrence first 
editions m the far corner Pining for a bit of smut, of course He had heard of 
Lady Chatterley afar off, A bad face he had, Gordon thought Pale, heavy, 
downy, with bad contours, Welsh, by the look of him-Nonconfoxmist, 
anyway He had the regular Dissenting pouches round the corners of his 
mouth. At home, president of the local Purity League or Seaside Vigilance 
Committee (rubber-soled slippers and electric torch, spotting kissing couples 
along the beach parade), and now up in town on the razzle. Gordon wished he 



j8o Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

would come m Sell him a copy of Women m Love How it would disappoint 
him' 

But no 1 The Welsh solicitor had funked it He tucked his umbrella under his 
arm and moved off with righteously turned backside But doubtless tonight, 
when da rkness hid his blushes, he’d slink into one of the rubber-shops and buy 
High Jinks in a Parisian Convent , by Sadie Blackeyes 

Gordon turned away from the door and back to the book-shelves In the 
shelves to your left as you came out of the library the new and nearly-new 
books were kept-a patch of bright colour that was meant to catch the eye of 
anyone glancmg through the glass door Their sleek unspotted backs seemed 
to yearn at you from the shelves ‘Buy me, buy me 1 ’ they seemed to be saying 
Novels fresh from the press-still unravished brides, pining for the paperkmfe 
to deflower them-and review copies, like youthful widows, blooming still 
though virgin no longer, and here and there, in sets of half a dozen, those 
pathetic spinster-things, ‘remainders’, still guarding hopefully their long 
preserv’d virginity Gordon turned his eyes away from the ‘remainders’ They 
called up evil memories The single wretched little book that he himself had 
published, two years ago, had sold exactly a hundred and fifty-three copies and 
then been ‘remaindered’, and even as a ‘remainder’ it hadn’t sold He passed 
the new books by and paused m front of the shelves which ran at right angles to 
them and which contained more second-hand books 

Over to the right were shelves of poetry Those m front of him were prose, a 
miscellaneous lot Upwards and downwards they were graded, from clean and 
expensive at eye-level to cheap and dingy at top and bottom In all book-shops 
there goes on a savage Darwinian struggle in which the works of living men 
gravitate to eye-level and the works of dead men go up or down— down to 
Gehenna or up to the throne, but always away from any position where they 
will be noticed Down in the bottom shelves the ‘classics’, the extinct monsters 
of the Victorian age, were quietly rotting Scott, Carlyle, Meredith, Ruskin, 
Pater, Stevenson-you could hardly read the names upon their broad dowdy 
backs In the top shelves, almost out of sight, slept the pudgy biographies of 
dukes Below those, saleable still and therefore placed within reach, was 
‘religious’ literature-all sects and all creeds, lumped indiscriminately 
together The World Beyond , by the author of Spirit Hands Have Touched me 
Dean Farrar’s Life of Christ Jesus the First Rotanan, Father Hilaire 
Chestnut’s latest book of R. C. propaganda. Religion always sells provided it is 
soppy enough Below, exactly at eye-level, was the contemporary stuff 
Priestley’s latest Dinky little books of reprinted ‘middles’ Cheer-up 
‘humour’ from Herbert and Knox and Milne, Some highbrow stuff as well A 
novel or two by Hemingway and Virginia Woolf Smart pseudo-Strachey 
predigested biographies. Snooty, refined books on safe painters and safe poets 
by those moneyed young beasts who glide so gracefully from Eton to 
Cambridge and from Cambridge to the literary reviews. 

Dull-eyed, be gazed at the wall of books He hated the whole lot of them, old 
and newy highbrow and lowbrow, snooty and chirpy The mere sight of them 
brought home to him his own sterility For here was he, supposedly a ‘writer’, 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 581 

and he couldn’t even ‘write’ 1 It wasn’t merely a question of not getting 
published, it was that he produced nothing, or next to nothing And all that 
tripe cluttering the shelves-well, at any rate it existed, it was an achievement 
of sorts Even the Dells and Deepmgs do at least turn out their yearly acre of 
print But it was the snooty ‘cultured’ kind of books that he hated the worst 
Books of criticism and belles-lettres The kind of thing that those moneyed 
young beasts from Cambridge write almost in their sleep-and that Gordon 
himself might have written if he had had a little more money Money and 
culture* In a country like England you can no more be cultured without money 
than you can join the Cavalry Club With the same instinct that makes a child 
waggle a loose tooth, he took out a snooty-lookmg volume— Some Aspects of the 
Italian Baroque-opened it, read a paragraph, and shoved it back with mingled 
loathing and envy That devastating omniscience* That noxious, horn- 
spectacled refinement* And the money that such refinement means' For after 
all, what is there behind it, except money’ Money for the right kind of 
education, money for influential friends, money for leisure and peace of mind, 
money for trips to Italy Money writes books, money sells them Give me not 
righteousness, O Lord, give me money, only money 
He jingled the coins in his pocket He was nearly thirty and had 
accomplished nothing, only his miserable book of poems that had fallen flatter 
than any pancake And ever since, for two whole years, he had been struggling 
m the labyrinth of a dreadful book that never got any further, and which, as he 
knew in his moments of clarity, never would get any further It was the lack of 
money, simply the lack of money, that robbed him of the power to ‘write’ He 
clung to that as to an article of faith Money, money, all is money* Could you 
write even a penny novelette without money to put heart m you’ Invention, 
energy, wit, style, charm-they’ve all got to be paid for m hard cash 
Nevertheless, as he looked along the shelves he felt himself a little 
comforted So many of the books were faded and unreadable. After all, we’re 
all in the same boat Memento mon For you and for me and for the snooty 
young men from Cambridge, the same oblivion waits-though doubtless it’ll 
wait rather longer for those snooty young men from Cambridge He looked at 
the time-dulled ‘classics’ near his feet Dead, all dead. Carlyle and Ruskin and 
Meredith and Stevenson-all are dead, God rot them He glanced over their 
faded titles Collected Letters of Robert Louis Stevenson Ha, ha* That’s good 
Collected Letters of Robert Louis Stevensonl Its top edge was black with dust 
Dust thou art, to dust returnest Gordon kicked Stevenson’s buckram 
backside Art there, old false-penny’ You’re cold meat, if ever Scotchman was 
Ping! The shop bell Gordon turned round Two customers, for the library 
A dejected, round-shouldered, lower-class woman, looking like a draggled 
duck nosing among garbage, seeped m, fumbling with a rush basket In her 
wake hopped a plump little sparrow of a woman, red-cheeked, middle-middle 
class, carrying under her arm a copy of The Forsyte Saga- title outwards, so 
that passers-by could spot her for a high-brow 
Gordon had taken off his sour expression. He greeted them with the homey, 
family-doctor geniality reserved for hbrary-subscribers 



582 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

‘Good afternoon, Mrs Weaver Good afternoon, Mrs Penn What terrible 
weather 1 ’ 

‘Shocking 1 ’ said Mrs Penn 

He stood aside to let them pass Mrs Weaver upset her rush basket and 
spilled on to the floor a much-thumbed copy of Ethel M Dell’s Silver 
Wedding Mrs Penn’s bright bird-eye lighted upon it Behind Mrs Weaver’s 
back she smiled up to Gordon, archly, as highbrow to highbrow Dell' The 
lowness of it' The books these lower classes read' Understandingly, he smiled 
back They passed into the library, highbrow to highbrow smiling 
Mrs Penn laid The Forsyte Saga on the table and turned her sparrow-bosom 
upon Gordon She was always very affable to Gordon She addressed him as 
Mister Comstock, shopwalker though he was, and held literary conversations 
with him There was the free-masonry of highbrows between them 
‘I hope you enjoyed The Forsyte Saga 3 Mrs Penn 5 ’ 

‘What a perfectly marvellous achievement that book is, Mr Comstock' Do 
you know that that makes the fourth time I’ve read it 5 An epic, a real epic'’ 
Mrs Weaver nosed among the books, too dim-witted to grasp that they were 
in alphabetical order 

‘I don’t know what to ’ave this week, that I don’t,’ she mumbled through 
untidy lips ‘My daughter she keeps on at me to ’ave a try at Deeping She’s 
great on Deeping, my daughter is But my son-in-law, now, ’e’s more for 
Burroughs I don’t know. I’m sure ’ 

A spasm passed over Mrs Penn’s face at the mention of Burroughs She 
turned her back markedly on Mrs Weaver 
‘What I feel, Mr Comstock, is that there’s something so big about 
Galsworthy He’s so broad, so universal, and yet at the same time so 
thoroughly English m spirit, so human His books are real human documents.’ 
‘And Priestley, too,’ said Gordon ‘I think Priestley’s such an awfully fine 
writer, don’t you 5 ’ 

‘Oh, he is 1 So big, so broad, so human' And so essentially English'’ 

Mrs Weaver pursed her bps. Behmd them were three isolated yellow teeth 
‘I think p’raps I can do better’n ’ave another Dell,’ she said ‘You ’ave got 
some more Dells, ’aven’t you 5 1 do enjoy a good read of Dell, I must say I says 
to my daughter, I says, “You can keep your Deepmgs and your Burroughses 
Give me Dell,” I says ’ 

Ding Dong Dell' Dukes and dogwhips! Mrs Penn’s eye signalled highbrow 
irony. Gordon returned her signal Keep m with Mrs Penn' A good, steady 
customer. 

‘Oh, certainly, Mrs Weaver We’ve got a whole shelf by Ethel M Dell 
Would you like The Desire of hts Life> Or perhaps you’ve read that Then what 
about The Alter of Honour? 

*1 wonder whether you have Hugh Walpole’s latest book?’ said Mrs Penn ‘I 
feel ht the mood this week for something epic, something big Now Walpole, 
you know, I consider a really great writer, I put him second only to 
OafeWpnhy. There’s something so big about him. And yet he’s so human with 
it* » 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 58 3 

‘And so essentially English,’ said Gordon 

‘Oh, of course* So essentially English’’ 

‘I b’lieve I’ll jest ’ave The Way of an Eagle over again,’ said Mrs Weaver 
finally ‘You don’t never seem to get tired of The Way of an Eagle , do you, 
now?’ 

‘It’s certainly astonishingly popular,’ said Gordon, diplomatically, his eye 
on Mrs Penn 

‘Oh, astonishingly*’ echoed Mrs Penn, ironically, her eye on Gordon 

He took their twopences and sent them happy away, Mrs Penn with 
Walpole’s Rogue Hemes and Mrs Weaver with The Way of an Eagle 

Soon he had wandered back to the other room and towards the shelves of 
poetry A melancholy fascination, those shelves had for him His own 
wretched book was there- skied, of course, high up among the unsaleable 
Mice, by Gordon Comstock, a sneaky little foolscap octavo, price three and 
sixpence but now reduced to a bob Of the thirteen B F s who had reviewed it 
(and The Times Lit Supp had declared that it showed ‘exceptional promise’) 
not one had seen the none too subtle joke of that title And in the two years he 
had been at McKechme’s bookshop, not a single customer, not a single one, 
had ever taken Mice out of its shelf 

There were fifteen or twenty shelves of poetry Gordon regarded them 
sourly Dud stuff, for the most part A little above eye-level, already on their 
way to heaven and oblivion, were the poets of yesteryear, the stars of his earlier 
youth Yeats, Davies, Housman, Thomas, De la Mare, Hardy Dead stars 
Below them, exactly at eye-level, were the squibs of the passing minute Eliot, 
Pound, Auden, Campbell, Day Lewis, Spender Very damp squibs, that lot 
Dead stars above, damp squibs below Shall we ever again get a wnter worth 
reading? But Lawrence was all right, and Joyce even better before he went off 
his coconut And if we did get a writer worth reading, should we know him 
when we saw him, so choked as we are with trash? 

Ping* Shop bell Gordon turned Another customer 

A youth of twenty, cherry-lipped, with gilded hair, tripped Nancifully m 
Moneyed, obviously He had the golden aura of money He had been m the 
shop before Gordon assumed the gentlemanly-servile mien reserved for new 
customers He repeated the usual formula 

‘Good afternoon Can I do anything for you? Are you looking for any 
particular book?’ 

‘Oh, no, not weally ’ An R-less Nancy voice ‘May I just bwowse> I simply 
couldn’t wesist your fwont window I have such a tewwible weakness for 
bookshops* So I just floated m-tee-hee*’ 

Float out again, then, Nancy Gordon smiled a cultured smile, as booklover 
to booklover 

‘Oh, please do. We like people to look round. Are you interested m poetry, 
by any chance?’ 

‘Oh, of course! I adore poetwy*’ 

Of course! Mangy little snob. There was a sub-artistic look about his 
clothes Gordon slid a ‘slim* red volume from the poetry shelves 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

‘These are just out They might interest you, perhaps They’re 
translations-somethmg rather out of the common Translations from the 
Bulgarian ’ 

Very subtle, that Now leave him to himself That’s the proper way with 
customers Don’t hustle them, let them browse for twenty minutes or so, then 
they get ashamed and buy something Gordon moved to the door, discreetly, 
keeping out of Nancy’s way, yet casually, one hand in his pocket, with the 
insouciant air proper to a gentleman 

Outside, the slimy street looked grey and drear From somewhere round the 
corner came the clatter of hooves, a cold hollow sound Caught by the wind, 
the dark columns of smoke from the chimneys veered over and rolled flatly 
down the sloping roofs Ah’ 

Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over 
The bending poplars, newly bare, 

And the dark ribbons of the chimneys 

Veer downward tumty tumty (something like ‘murky’) air 

Good But the impulse faded His eye fell again upon the ad-posters across 
the street 

He almost wanted to laugh at them, they were so feeble, so dead-alive, so 
unappetizing As though anybody could be tempted by those * Like succubi 
with pimply backsides But they depressed him all the same The money-stink, 
everywhere the money-stmk He stole a glance at the Nancy, who had drifted 
away from the poetry shelves and taken out a large expensive book on the 
Russian ballet He was holding it delicately between his pink non-prehensile 
paws, as a squirrel holds a nut, studying the photographs Gordon knew his 
type The moneyed ‘artistic’ young man Not an artist himself, exactly, but a 
hanger-on of the arts, frequenter of studios, retailer of scandal A mce-lookmg 
boy, though, for all his Nancitude The skin at the back of his neck was as 
silky-smooth as the inside of a shell You can’t have a skm like that under five 
hundred a year A sort of charm he had, a glamour, like all moneyed people 
Money and charm, who shall separate thenP 

Gordon thought of Ravelston, his charming, rich friend, editor of 
Antichrist , of whom he was extravagantly fond, and whom he did not see so 
often as once in a fortnight, and of Rosemary, his girl, who loved him~adored 
him, so she said-and who, all the same, had never slept with him Money, once 
again; all is money All human relationships must be purchased with money If 
you have no money, men won’t care for you, women won’t love you, won’t, 
that is, care for you or love you the last little bit that matters And how right 
they are, after all* For, moneyless, you are unlovable Though I speak with the 
tongues of men and of angels But then. If I haven’t money, I don't speak with 
1 he tongues of men and of angels, 

- He looked again at the ad-posters He really hated them this time That 
Vitamalt one, for instance* ‘Hike all day on a slab of Vitamalt*’ A youthful 
couple, boy and girl, m clean-minded hiking kit, their hair picturesquely 
- tousled by the wind, climbing a stile against a Sussex landscape That girl’s 
face! Tile awful bright tomboy cheenness of it* The kind of girl who goes in for 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 585 

Plenty of Clean Fun Windswept Tight khaki shorts but that doesn’t mean 
you can pinch her backside And next to them-Corner Table ‘Corner Table 
enjoys his meal with Bovex’ Gordon examined the thing with the intimacy of 
hatred The idiotic grinning face, like the face of a self-satisfied rat, the slick 
black hair, the silly spectacles Corner Table, heir of the ages, victor of 
Waterloo, Comer Table, Modern man as his master want him to be A docile 
little porker, sitting in the money-sty, drinking Bovex 

Faces passed, wind-yellowed A tram boomed across the square, and the 
clock over the Prince of Wales struck three A couple of old creatures, a tramp 
or a beggar and his wife, m long greasy overcoats that reached almost to the 
ground, were shuffling towards the shop Book-pinchers, by the look of them 
Better keep an eye on the boxes outside The old man halted on the kerb a few 
yards away while his wife came to the door She pushed it open and looked up 
at Gordon, between grey strings of hair, with a sort of hopeful malevolence 
‘Ju buy books’’ she demanded hoarsely 
‘Sometimes It depends what books they are ’ 

‘I gossome lovely books ’ere ’ 

She came in, shutting the door with a clang The Nancy glanced over his 
shoulder distastefully and moved a step or two away, mto the corner The old 
woman had produced a greasy little sack from under her overcoat She moved 
confidentially nearer to Gordon She smelt of very, very old breadcrusts 
‘Will you ’ave ’em’’ she said, clasping the neck of the sack ‘Only ’alf a crown 
the lot ’ 

‘What are they’ Let me see them, please ’ 

‘ Lovely books, they are,’ she breathed, bending over to open the sack and 
emitting a sudden very powerful whiff of breadcrusts 

“Ere 1 ’ she said, and thrust an armful of filthy-lookmg books almost into 
Gordon’s face 

They were an 1884 edition of Charlotte M Yonge’s novels, and had the 
appearance of having been slept on for many years Gordon stepped back, 
suddenly revolted 

‘We can’t possibly buy those,’ he said shortly 
‘Can’t buy ’em? Why can’t yer buy ’em’’ 

‘Because they’re no use to us We can’t sell that kmd of thing.’ 

‘Wotcher make me take ’em out 0’ me bag for, then?’ demanded the old 
woman ferociously 

Gordon made a detour round her, to avoid the smell, and held the door 
open, silently. No use arguing You had people of this type commg into the 
shop all day long The old woman made off, mumbling, with malevolence in 
the hump of her shoulders, and joined her husband He paused on the kerb to 
cough, so fruitily that you could hear him through the door. A clot of phlegm, 
like a little white tongue, came slowly out between his lips and was ejected into 
the gutter Then the two old creatures shuffled away, beetle-like in the long 
greasy overcoats that hid everything except their feet 
Gordon watched them go They were just by-products The throw-outs of 
the money-god. All over London, by tens of thousands, draggled old beasts of 



$86 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

that description, creeping like unclean beetles to the grave 

He gazed out at the graceless street At this moment it seemed to him that m 
a street like this, m a town like this, every life that is lived must be meaningless 
and intolerable The sense of disintegration, of decay, that is endemic m our 
time, was strong upon him Somehow it was mixed up with the ad-posters 
opposite He looked now with more seeing eyes at those grinning yard-wide 
faces After all, there was more there than mere silliness, greed, and vulgarity 
Comer Table grins at you, seemingly optimistic, with a flash of false teeth But 
what is behind the grin? Desolation, emptiness, prophecies of doom For can 
you not see, if you know how to look, that behind that slick self-satisfaction, 
that tittering fat-bellied triviality, there is nothing but a frightful emptiness, a 
secret despair? The great death-wish of the modern world Suicide pacts 
Heads stuck m gas-ovens in lonely maisonettes French letters and Amen Pills 
And the reverberations of future wars Enemy aeroplanes flying over London, 
the deep threatening hum of the propellers, the shattering thunder of the 
bombs It is all written in Corner Table’s face 
More customers coming Gordon stood back, gentlemanly-servile 
The door-bell clanged Two upper-middle-class ladies sailed noisily in One 
pink and fruity, thirty-fivish, with voluptuous bosom burgeoning from her 
coat of squirrel-skm, emitting a super-femmme scent of Parma violets the 
other middle-aged, tough, and curried-India, presumably Close behind them 
a dark, grubby, shy young man slipped through the doorway as apologetically 
as a cat He was one of the shop’s best customers-a flitting, solitary creature 
who was almost too shy to speak and who by some strange manipulation kept 
himself always a day away from a shave 
Gordon repeated his formula 

‘Good afternoon Can I do anything for you? Are you looking for any 
particular book?’ 

Fruity-face overwhelmed him with a smile, but curry-face decided to treat 
the question as an impertinence Ignoring Gordon, she drew fruity-face across 
to the shelves next to the new books where the dog-books and cat-books were 
kept The two of them immediately began taking books out of the shelves and 
talking loudly Curry-face had the voice of a drill-sergeant She was no doubt a 
colonel’s wife, or widow. The Nancy, still deep in the big book on the Russian 
ballet, edged delicately away His face said that he would leave the shop if his 
privacy were disturbed again. The shy young man had already found his way 
to the poetry shelves The two ladies were fairly frequent visitors to the shop. 
They always wanted to see books about cats and dogs, but never actually 
bought anything There were two whole shelves of dog-books and cat-books 
‘Ladies’ Corner,’ old McKechme called it 
Another customer arrived, for the library An ugly girl of twenty, hatless, m 
a white overall, with a sallow, blithering, honest face and powerful spectacles 
that dbtnrtedher eyes. She was an assistant at a chemist’s shop Gordon put on 
has homey library manner. She smiled at him, and with a gait as clumsy as a 
bear's followed him into the library 
f What kind of book would you like this time, Miss Weeks?’ 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 587 

‘Well’ -she clutched the front of her overall Her distorted, black-treacle 
eyes beamed trustfully into his ‘Well, what I’d really like’s a good hot-stuff 
love story You know-something modem ’ 

‘Something modern 5 Something by Barbara Bedworthy for instance 5 Have 
you read Almost a Virgin 5 ’ 

‘Oh no, not her She’s too Deep. I can’t bear Deep books But I want 
something-well, you know-modem Sex-problems and divorce and all that 
You know ’ 

‘Modern, but not Deep,’ said Gordon, as lowbrow to lowbrow 

He ranged among the hot-stuff modern love-stories There were not less 
than three hundred of them in the library From the front room came the 
voices of the two upper-middle-class ladies, the one fruity, the other curried, 
disputing about dogs They had taken out one of the dog-books and were 
examining the photographs. Fruity-voice enthused over the photograph of a 
Peke, the lckle angel pet, wiv his gweat big Soulful eyes and his lckle black 
nosie-oh, so ducky-duck’ But curry-voice-yes, undoubtedly a colonel’s 
widow-said Pekes were soppy Give her dogs with guts-dogs that would fight, 
she said, she hated these soppy lapdogs, she said, ‘You have no Soul, Bedeha, 
no Soul,’ said fruity-voice plaintively The door-bell pmged again Gordon 
handed the chemist’s girl Seven Scarlet Nights and booked it on her ticket She 
took a shabby leather purse out of her overall pocket and paid him twopence 

He went back to the front room. The Nancy had put his book back m the 
wrong shelf and vamshed A lean, straight-nosed, brisk woman, with sensible 
clothes and gold-nmmed pmce-nez-schoolmarm possibly, feminist 
certainly-came in and demanded Mrs Wharton-Beverley’s history of the 
suffrage movement With secret joy Gordon told her that they hadn’t got it. 
She stabbed his male incompetence with gimlet eyes and went out again The 
thin young man stood apologetically in the corner, his face buried m 
D H Lawrence’s Collected Poems, like some long-legged bird with its head 
buried under its wing. 

Gordon waited by the door Outside, a shabby-genteel old man with a 
strawberry nose and a khaki muffler round his throat was picking over the 
books in the sixpenny box The two upper-middle-class ladies suddenly 
departed, leaving a litter of open books on the table Frmty-face cast reluctant 
backward glances at the dog-books, but curry-face drew her away, resolute not 
to buy anything Gordon held the door open The two ladies sailed noisily out, 
ignoring him. 

He watched their fur-coated upper-middle-class backs go down the street 
The old strawberry-nosed man was talking to himself as he pawed over the 
books A bit wrong m the head, presumably. He would pinch something if he 
wasn’t watched The wind blew colder, drying the slime of the street. Time to 
light up presently. Caught by a swirl of air, the tom strip of paper on the 
Q T. Sauce advertisement fluttered sharply, like a piece of washing on the line. 
Ah! 

Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over 
The bending poplars, newly bare. 



$88 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

And the dark ribbons of the chimneys 
Veer downward, flicked by whips of air 
Tom posters flutter 

Not bad, not bad at all But he had no wish to go on-could not go on, indeed 
He fingered the money m his pocket, not chinking it, lest the shy young man 
should hear Twopence-halfpenny No tobacco all tomorrow His bones 
ached 

A light sprang up m the Prince of Wales They would be swabbing out the 
bar The old strawberry-nosed man was reading an Edgar Wallace out of the 
twopenny box A tram boomed in the distance In the room upstairs Mr 
McKechme, who seldom came down to the shop, drowsed by the gas-fire, 
white-haired and white-bearded, with snuff-box handy, over his calf-bound 
folio of Middleton’s Travels m the Levant 
The thin young man suddenly realized that he was alone and looked up 
guiltily He was a habitui of bookshops, yet never stayed longer than ten 
minutes m any one shop A passionate hunger for books, and the fear of being a 
nuisance, were constantly at war in him After ten minutes in any shop he 
would grow uneasy, feel himself de trop 3 and take to flight, having bought 
something out of sheer nervousness Without speaking he held out the copy of 
Lawrence’s poems and awkwardly extracted three florins from his pocket In 
handing them to Gordon he dropped one Both dived for it simultaneously, 
their heads bumped against one another The young man stood back, blushing 
sallowly 

‘I’ll wrap it up for you,’ said Gordon 

But the shy young man shook his head-he stammered so badly that he never 
spoke when it was avoidable He clutched his book to him and slipped out with 
the air of having committed some disgraceful action 

Gordon was alone He wandered back to the door The strawberry-nosed 
man glanced over his shoulder, caught Gordon’s eye, and moved off, foiled 
He had been on the point of slipping Edgar Wallace into his pocket The clock 
over the Prince of Wales struck a quarter past three 
Ding Dong! A quarter past three Light up at half past Four and three- 
quarter hours till closing time. Five and a quarter hours till supper Twopence 
halfpenny in pocket No tobacco tomorrow 
Suddenly a ravishmg, irresistible desire to smoke came over Gordon He 
had made up his mind not to smoke this afternoon He had only four cigarettes 
left They must be saved for tonight, when he intended to ‘write’, for he could 
no more ‘write’ without tobacco than without air Nevertheless, he had got to 
have a smoke He took out his packet of Player’s Weights and extracted one of 
the dwarfish cigarettes It was sheer stupid indulgence, it meant half an hour 
off tonight’s *wnting’ time. But there was no resisting it With a sort of 
shameful joy he sucked the soothing smoke into his lungs 
The reflection of his own face looked back at him from the greyish pane, 
Gordon Comstock, author of Mice; en Van trmtiesme de son eage, and moth- 
eaten already. Only twenty-six teeth left However, Villon at the same age was 
poxed on his own showing. Let’s be thankful for small mercies 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 589 

He watched the ribbon of torn paper whirling, fluttering on the Q T Sauce 
advertisement Our civilization is dying It must be dying But it isn’t going to 
die in its bed Presently the aeroplanes are coming Zoom- whizz-crash I The 
whole western world going up in a roar of high explosives 

He looked at the darkening street, at the greyish reflection of his face m the 
pane, at the shabby figures shuffling past Almost involuntarily he repeated’ 

‘C’est rEnnui-Poeil charge d’un pleur mvolontaire, 

II rfive d’echafauds en fumant son houka f ’ 

Money, money 1 Corner Table ! The humming of the aeroplanes and the 
crash of the bombs 

Gordon squinted up at the leaden sky Those aeroplanes are coming In 
imagination he saw them coming now, squadron after squadron, innumerable, 
darkening the sky like clouds of gnats With his tongue not quite against his 
teeth he made a buzzing, bluebottle-on-the-window-pane sound to represent 
the humming of the aeroplanes It was a sound which, at that moment, he 
ardently desired to hear 


2 


Gordon walked homeward against the rattling wind, which blew his hair 
backward and gave him more of a ‘good’ forehead than ever His manner 
conveyed to the passers-by-at least, he hoped it did-that if he wore no 
overcoat it was from pure caprice His overcoat was up the spout for fifteen 
shillings, as a matter of fact 

Willowbed Road,NW 5 was not definitely slummy, only dingy and depressing 
There were real slums hardly five minutes’ walk away Tenement houses 
where families slept five in a bed, and, when one of them died, slept every night 
with the corpse until it was buried, alley-ways where girls of fifteen were 
deflowered by boys of sixteen against leprous plaster walls But Willowbed 
Road itself contrived to keep up a kind of mingy, lower-middle-class decency 
There was even a dentist’s brass plate on one of the houses In quite two-thirds 
of them, amid the lace curtains of the parlour window, there was a green card 
with ‘Apartments’ on it m silver lettering, above the peeping foliage of an 
aspidistra 

Mrs Wisbeach, Gordon’s landlady, specialized in ‘"single gentlemen’ Bed- 
sitting-rooms, with gaslight laid on and find your own heating, baths extra 
(there was a geyser), andmeals m the tomb-dark dining-room with the phalanx 
of clotted sauce-bottles m the middle of the table. Gordon, who came home for 
his midday dinner, paid twenty-seven and six a week 

The gaslight shone yellow through the frosted transom above the door of 



jpo Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

Number 31 Gordon took out his key and fished about m the keyhole-m that 
kind of house the key never quite fits the lock The darkish little hallway-m 
reality it was only a passage-smelt of dishwater, cabbage, rag mats, and 
bedroom slops Gordon glanced at the japanned tray on the hall-stand No 
letters, of course He had told himself not to hope for a letter, and nevertheless 
had contmued to hope A stale feeling, not quite a pain, settled upon his breast 
Rosemary might have written 1 It was four days now since she had written 
Moreover, there were a couple of poems that he had sent out to magazines and 
had not yet had returned to him The one thing that made the evening bearable 
was to find a letter waiting for him when he got home But he received very few 
letters-four or five in a week at the very most 
On the left of the hall was the never-used parlour, then came the staircase, 
and beyond that the passage ran down to the kitchen and to the 
unapproachable lair inhabited by Mrs Wisbeach herself As Gordon came in, 
the door at the end of the passage opened a foot or so Mrs Wisbeach’s face 
emerged, inspected him briefly but suspiciously, and disappeared again It was 
quite impossible to get in or out of the house, at any time before eleven at 
night, without being scrutmized in this manner Just what Mrs Wisbeach 
suspected you of it was hard to say, smuggling women into the house, possibly 
She was one of those malignant respectable women who keep lodging-houses 
Age about forty-five, stout but active, with a pink, fine-featured, horribly 
observant face, beautifully grey hair, and a permanent grievance 
Gordon halted at the foot of the narrow stairs Above, a coarse rich voice was 
singing, ‘Who’s afraid of the Big Bad WolP’ A very fat man of thirty-eight or 
nine came round the angle of the stairs, with the light dancing step peculiar to 
fat men, dressed in a smart grey suit, yellow shoes, a rakish trilby hat, and a 
belted blue overcoat of startling vulgarity This was Flaxman, the first-floor 
lodger and travelling representative of the Queen of Sheba Toilet Requisites 
Co He saluted Gordon with a lemon-coloured glove as he came down. 

‘Hullo, chappie*’ he said blithely (Flaxman called everyone ‘chappie’ ) 
‘How’s life with you^’ 

‘Bloody,’ said Gordon shortly. 

Flaxman had reached the bottom of the stairs He threw a roly-poly arm 
affectionately round Gordon’s shoulders 
‘Cheer up, old man, cheer up* You look like a bloody funeral I’m off down 
to the Crichton. Come on down and have a quick one,’ 

‘I can’t. I’ve got to work ’ 

‘Oh, helll Be matey, can’t you? What’s the good of moomng about up here^ 
Come on down to the Cn and we’ll pinch the barmaid’s bum ’ 

Gordon wriggled free of Flaxman’s arm. Like all small frail people, he hated 
being touched. Flaxman merely grinned, with the typical fat man’s good 
bnmour. He was really horribly fat. He filled his trousers as though he had 
ten teted and then poured into them. But of course, like other fat people, he 
never admitted to being fat No fat person ever uses the word ‘fat’ if there is 
any way of avoiding it. ‘Stout* is the word they use-or, better still, ‘robust’. A 
>fa£ man is never so happy as when he is describing himself as ‘robust’ 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 591 

Flaxman, at his first meeting with Gordon, had been on the point of calling 
himself ‘robust’, but something m Gordon’s greemsh eye had deterred him 
He compromised on ‘stout’ instead 

‘I do admit, chappie,’ he said, ‘to being- well, just a wee bit on the stout side 
Nothing unwholesome, you know ’ He patted the vague frontier between his 
belly and his chest ‘Good firm flesh I’m pretty nippy on my feet, as a matter 
of fact But-well, I suppose you might call me stout ’ 

‘Like Cortez,’ Gordon suggested 

‘Cortez? Cortez? Was that the chappie who was always wandering about m 
the mountains in Mexico?’ 

‘That’s the fellow He was stout, but he had eagle eyes ’ 

‘Ah? Now that’s funny Because the wife said something rather like that to 
me once “George,” she said, “you’ve got the most wonderful eyes m the 
world You’ve got eyes just like an eagle,” she said That would be before she 
married me, you’ll understand ’ 

Flaxman was living apart from his wife at the moment A little while back 
the Queen of Sheba Toilet Requisites Co had unexpectedly paid out a bonus 
of thirty pounds to all its travellers, and at the same time Flaxman and two 
others had been sent across to Pans to press the new Sexapeal Naturetmt 
lipstick on various French firms Flaxman had not thought it necessary to 
mention the thirty pounds to his wife He had had the time of his life on that 
Pans trip, of course Even now, three months afterwards, his mouth watered 
when he spoke of it He used to entertain Gordon with luscious descriptions 
Ten days in Pans with thirty quid that wifie hadn’t heard about 1 Oh boy 1 But 
unfortunately there had been a leakage somewhere, Flaxman had got home to 
find retribution awaiting him His wife had broken his head with a cut-glass 
whisky decanter, a wedding present which they had had for fourteen years, and 
then fled to her mother’s house, taking the children with her Hence Flaxman’s 
exile in Willowbed Road But he wasn’t letting it worry him It would blow 
over, no doubt, it had happened several times before 

Gordon made another attempt to get past Flaxman and escape up the stairs 
The dreadful thing was that m his heart he was pining to go with him He 
needed a drmk so badly-the mere mention of the Crichton Arms had made 
him feel thirsty But it was impossible, of course, he had no money Flaxman 
put an arm across the stairs, barring his way He was genuinely fond of 
Gordon He considered him ‘clever’ -‘cleverness’, to him, being a kind of 
amiable lunacy Moreover, he detested being alone, even for so short a time as 
it would take him to walk to the pub 

‘Come on, chappie 1 ’ he urged ‘You want a Guinness to buck you up, that’s 
what you want You haven’t seen the new girl they’ve got in the saloon bar yet 
Oh, boy 1 There’s a peach for you 1 ’ 

‘So that’s why you’re all dolled up, is it?’ said Gordon, looking coldly at 
Flaxman’s yellow gloves. 

‘You bet it is, chappie! Coo, what a peach 1 Ash blonde she is And she knows 
a thing or two, that girlie does I gave her a stick of our Sexapeal Naturetmt last 
night. You ought to have seed hfer wag her little bottom at me as she went past 



592 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

my table Does she give me the palpitations? Does she? Oh, boy 1 ’ 

Flaxman wriggled lascivously His tongue appeared between his lips Then, 
suddenly pretending that Gordon was the ash-blonde barmaid, he seized him 
by the waist and gave him a tender squeeze Gordon shoved him away For a 
moment the desire to go down to the Crichton Arms was so ravishing that it 
almost overcame him Oh, for a pint of beer' He seemed almost to feel it going 
down his throat If only he had had any money' Even sevenpence for a pint 
But what was the use? Twopence halfpenny in pocket You can’t let other 
people buy your drinks for you 

‘Oh, leave me alone, for God’s sake 1 ’ he said irritably, stepping out of 
Flaxman’s reach, and went up the stairs without looking back 

Flaxman settled his hat on his head and made for the front door, mildly 
offended Gordon reflected dully that it was always like this nowadays He was 
for ever snubbing friendly advances* Of course it was money that was at the 
bottom of it, always money You can’t be friendly, you can’t even be civil, 
when you have no money m your pocket A spasm of self-pity went through 
him His heart yearned for the saloon bar at the Crichton, the lovely smell of 
beer, the warmth and bright lights, the cheery voices, the clatter of glasses on 
the beer-wet bar Money, money' He went on, up the dark evil-smellmg stairs 
The thought of his cold lonely bedroom at the top of the house was like a doom 
before him 

On the second floor lived Lorenheim, a dark, meagre, lizard-like creature of 
uncertain age and race, who made about thirty-five shillings a week by touting 
vacuum-cleaners Gordon always went very hurriedly past Lorenheim’s door 
Lorenheim was one of those people who have not a smgle friend m the world 
and who are devoured by a lust for company His loneliness was so deadly that 
if you so much as slowed your pace outside his door he was hable to pounce out 
upon you and half drag, half wheedle you in to listen to interminable paranoiac 
tales of girls he had seduced and employers he had scored off And his room 
was more cold and squalid than even a lodging-house bedroom has any right to 
be There were always half-eaten bits of bread and margarine lying about 
everywhere The only other lodger in the house was an engineer of some kind, 
employed on mghtwork Gordon only saw him occasionally-a massive man 
with a grim, discoloured face, who wore a bowler hat indoors and out 

In the familiar darkness of his room, Gordon felt for the gas-jet and lighted 
it. The room was medium-sized, not big enough to be curtained into two, but 
too big to be sufficiently warmed by one defective oil lamp It had the sort of 
furniture you expect in a top floor back White-quilted single-bed, brown lmo 
floor-coveringj wash-hand-stand with jug and basin of that cheap white ware 
which you can never see without thinking.of chamberpots On the wmdow-sill 
there was a sickly aspidistra m a green-glazed pot. 

Dp against this, under the window, there was a kitchen table with an 
infestamed green cloth This was Gordon’s ‘writing’ table. It was only after a 
hitter stru^le that he had induced Mrs Wisbeach to give him a kitchen table 
instead; of the bamboo ‘occasional’ table-a mere stand for the 
aspidis^-whjeh she considered proper for a top floor back. And even now 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 59 3 

there was endless nagging because Gordon would never allow his table to be 
‘tidied up’ The ' table was m a permanent mess It was almost covered with a 
muddle of papers, perhaps two hundred sheets of sermon paper, grimy and 
dog-eared, and all written on and crossed out and written on agam-a sort of 
sordid labyrinth of papers to which only Gordon possessed the key There was 
a film of dust over everything, and there were several foul little trays 
containing tobacco ash and the twisted stubs of cigarettes Except for a few 
books on the mantelpiece, this table, with its mess of papers, was the sole mark 
Gordon’s personality had left on the room 

It was beastly cold Gordon thought he would light the oil lamp He lifted 
lt-it felt very light, the spare oil can also was empty-no oil till Friday He 
applied a match, a dull yellow flame crept unwillingly round the wick It might 
burn for a couple of hours, with any luck As Gordon threw away the match his 
eye fell upon the aspidistra m its grass-green pot It was a peculiarly mangy 
specimen It had only seven leaves and never seemed to put forth any new 
ones Gordon had a sort of secret feud with the aspidistra Many a time he had 
furtively attempted to kill it— starving it of water, grinding hot cigarette-ends 
against its stem, even mixing salt with its earth But the beastly thmgs are 
practically immortal In almost any circumstances they can preserve a wilting, 
diseased existence Gordon stood up and deliberately wiped his kerosmy 
fingers on the aspidistra leaves 

At this moment Mrs Wisbeach’s voice rang shrewishly up the stairs 

‘Mister Corn-stock'’ 

Gordon went to the door ‘Yes?’ he called down 

‘Your supper’s been waiting for you this ten minutes Why can’t you come 
down and have it, ’stead of keeping me waiting for the washing up?’ 

Gordon went down The dmmg-room was on the first floor, at the back, 
opposite Flaxman’s room It was a cold, close-smelling room, twilit even at 
midday There were more aspidistras m it than Gordon had ever accurately 
counted They were all over the place-on the sideboard, on the floor, on 
‘occasional’ tables; in the window there was a sort of florist’s stand of them, 
blocking out the light In the half-darkness, with aspidistras all about you, you 
had the feeling of being in some sunless aquarium amid the dreary foliage of 
water-flowers Gordon’s supper was set out, waiting for him, in the circle of 
white light that the cracked gas-jet cast upon the table cloth He sat down with 
his back to the fireplace (there was an aspidistra m the grate instead of a fire) 
and ate his plate of cold beef and his two slices of crumbly white bread, with 
Canadian butter, mousetrap cheese and Pan Yan pickle, and drank a glass of 
cold but musty water 

When he went back to his room the oil lamp had got going, more or less It 
was hot enough to boil a kettle by, he thought. And now for the great event of 
the evening-bis illicit cup of tea. He made himself a cup of tea almost every 
night, in the deadliest secrecy. Mrs Wisbeach refused to give her lodgers tea 
with their supper, because she ‘couldn’t be bothered with hotting up extra 
water’, but at the same time making tea m your bedroom was strictly 
forbidden. Gordon looked with disgust at the muddled papers on the table He 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

told himself defiantly that he wasn’t going to do any work tonight He would 
have a cup of tea and smoke up his remaimng cigarettes, and read King Lear or 
Sherlock Holmes His books were on the mantelpiece beside the alarm 
clock- Shakespeare m the Everyman edition, Sherlock Holmes , Villon’s poems, 
Roderick Random , Les Fleurs du Mai , a pile of French novels But he read 
nothing nowadays, except Shakespeare and Sherlock Holmes Meanwhile, that 
cup of tea 

Gordon went to the door, pushed it ajar, and listened No sound of Mrs 
Wisbeach You had to be very careful, she was quite capable of sneaking 
upstairs and catching you m the act This tea-making was the major household 
offence, next to bringing a woman in Quietly he bolted the door, dragged his 
cheap suitcase from under the bed, and unlocked it From it he extracted a 
sixpenny Woolworth’s kettle, a packet of Lyons’ tea, a tin of condensed milk, a 
tea-pot, and a cup They were all packed in newspaper to prevent them from 
chinking 

He had his regular procedure for making tea First he half filled the kettle 
with water from the jug and set it on the oil stove Then he knelt down and 
spread out a piece of newspaper Yesterday’s tea-leaves were still in the pot, of 
course He shook them out on to the newspaper, cleaned out the pot with his 
thumb and folded the leaves into a bundle Presently he would smuggle them 
downstairs That was always the most risky part-getting rid of the used tea- 
leaves It was like the difficulty murderers have m disposing of the body As for 
the cup, he always washed it in his hand basin in the morning A squalid 
business It sickened him, sometimes It was queer how furtively you had to 
live in Mrs Wisbeach’s house You had the feeling that she was always 
watching you, and indeed, she was given to tiptoeing up and downstairs at all 
hours, in hope of catching the lodgers up to mischief It was one of those 
houses where you cannot even go to the w c m peace because of the feeling that 
somebody is listening to you 

Gordon unbolted the door again and listened intently No one stirring Ah 1 
A clatter of crockery far below Mrs Wisbeach was washing up the supper 
things. Probably safe to go down, then 
He tiptoed down, clutching the damp bundle of tea-leaves against his breast 
The w c was on the second floor At the angle of the stairs he halted, listened a 
moment longer Ah 1 Another clatter of crockery 
All clear! Gordon Comstock, poet (‘of exceptional promise’, The Times Lit 
Supp had said), hurriedly slipped into the w c , flung his tea-leaves down the 
waste-pipe, and pulled the plug. Then he hurried back to his room, rebolted 
the door, and, with precautions against noise, brewed himself a fresh pot of tea 
The room was passably warm by now The tea and a cigarette worked their 
short-lived magic He began to feel a little less bored and angry Should he do a 
spot of work after all? He ought to work, of course. He always hated himself 
afterwards when he had wasted a whole evening Half unwillingly, he shoved 
his chair up to the table It needed an effort even to disturb that frightful jungle 
Of papers. He pulled a few grimy sheets towards him, spread them out, and 
looked at them. God, what a mess* Written on, scored out, written over, scored 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 595 

out again, till they were like poor old hacked cancer-patients after twenty 
operations But the handwriting, where it was not crossed out, was delicate and 
‘scholarly’ With pam and trouble Gordon had acquired that ‘scholarly’ hand, 
so different from the beastly copper-plate they had taught him at school 
Perhaps he would work, for a little while, anyway He rummaged m the litter 
of papers Where was that passage he had been working on yesterday? The 
poem was an immensely long one-that is, it was going to be immensely long 
when it was finished-two thousand lines or so, m rhyme royal, describing a 
day in London London Pleasures , its name was It was a huge, ambitious 
project-the kmd of thing that should only be undertaken by people with 
endless leisure Gordon had not grasped that fact when he began the poem, he 
grasped it now, however How light-heartedly he had begun it, two years ago' 
When he had chucked up everything and descended into the slime of poverty, 
the conception of this poem had been at least a part of his motive He had felt so 
certain, then, that he was equal to it But somehow, almost from the start, 
London Pleasures had gone wrong It was too big for him, that was the truth It 
had never really progressed, it had simply fallen apart into a series of 
fragments And out of two years’ work that was all that he had to show-just 
fragments, incomplete in themselves and impossible to join together On every 
one of those sheets of paper there was some hacked scrap of verse which had 
been written and rewritten and rewritten over intervals of months There were 
not five hundred lines that you could say were definitely finished And he had 
lost the power to add to it any longer, he could only tinker with this passage or 
that, groping now here, now there, in its confusion It was no longer a thing 
that he created, it was merely a nightmare with which he struggled 

For the rest, in two whole years he had produced nothing except a handful of 
short poems-perhaps a score m all It was so rarely that he could attain the 
peace of mind m which poetry, or prose for that matter, has got to be written 
The times when he ‘could not’ work grew commoner and commoner Of all 
types of human being, only the artist takes it upon him to say that he ‘cannot’ 
work But it is quite true, there are times when one cannot work. Money again, 
always money 1 Lack of money means discomfort, means squalid worries, 
means shortage of tobacco, means ever-present conciousness of failure-above 
all, it means loneliness How can you be anything but lonely on two quid a 
week? And m loneliness no decent book was ever written It was quite certain 
that London Pleasures would never be the poem he had conceived-it was quite 
certain, indeed, that it would never even be finished. And m the moments 
when he faced facts Gordon himself was aware of this 
Yet all the same, and all the more for that very reason, he went on with it It 
was something to cling to It was a way of hitting back at his poverty and his 
loneliness And after all, there were tunes when the mood of creation returned, 
or seemed to return. It returned tonight, for just a little while-just as long as it 
takes to smoke two cigarettes. With smoke tickling his lungs, he abstracted 
himself from the mean and actual world He drove his mind into the abyss 
where poetry is written The gas-jet sang soothing overhead Words became 
vivid and momentous things A couplet, written a year ago and left as 



jpS Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

unfinished, caught his eye with a note of doubt He repeated it to himself, over 
and over It was wrong, somehow It had seemed all right, a year ago, now, on 
the other hand, it seemed subtly vulgar He rummaged among the sheets of 
foolscap till he found one that had nothing written on the back, turned it over, 
wrote the couplet out anew, wrote a dozen different versions of it, repeated 
each of them over and over to himself Finally there was none that satisfied 
him The couplet would have to go It was cheap and vulgar He found the 
original sheet of paper and scored the couplet out with thick lines And in 
doing this there was a sense of achievement, of time not wasted, as though the 
destruction of much labour were m some way an act of creation 

Suddenly a double knock deep below made the whole house rattle Gordon 
started His mmd fled upwards from the abyss The post 1 London Pleasures was 
forgotten 

His heart fluttered Perhaps Rosemary had written Besides, there were 
those two poems he had sent to the magazines One of them, indeed, he had 
almost given up as lost, he had sent it to an American paper, the Californian 
Review, months ago Probably they wouldn’t even bother to send it back But 
the other was with an English paper, the Primrose Quarterly He had wild 
hopes of that one The Primrose Quarterly was one of those poisonous literary 
papers in which the fashionable Nancy Boy and the professional Roman 
Catholic walk bras dessus, bras dessous It was also by a long way the most 
influential literary paper m England You were a made man once you had had a 
poem in it In his heart Gordon knew that the Primrose Quarterly would never 
print his poems. He wasn’t up to their standard Still, miracles sometimes 
happen, or, if not miracles, accidents After all, they’d had his poem six weeks 
Would they keep it six weeks if they didn’t mean to accept it? He tried to quell 
the insane hope But at the worst there was a chance that Rosemary had 
written. It was four whole days since she had written She wouldn’t do it, 
perhaps, if she knew how it disappointed him Her letters-long, ill-spelt 
letters, full of absurd jokes and protestations of love for him-meant far more to 
him than she could ever understand They were a reminder that there was still 
somebody m the world who cared for him They even made up for the times 
when some beast had sent back one of his poems, and, as a matter of fact, the 
magazines always did send back his poems, except Antichrist , whose editor, 
Ravelston, was his personal friend 

There was a shuffling below. It was always some minutes before Mrs 
Wisbeach brought the letters upstairs She liked to paw them about, feel them 
to see how thick they were, read their postmarks, hold them up to the light and 
Speculate on their contents, before yielding them to their rightful owners She 
exercised a sort of droit du seigneur over letters. Coming to her house, they 
were, she felt, at least partially hers. If you had gone to the front door and 
collected your own letters she would have resented it bitterly On the other 
band* she also resented the labour of carrying them upstairs You would hear 
her footsteps very slowly ascending, and then, if there was a letter for you, 
there would be loud aggrieved breathing on the landing-this to let you know 
that you had put Mrs Wisbeach out of breath by dragging her up all those 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying $97 

stairs Finally, with a little impatient grunt, the letters would be shoved under 
your door 

Mrs Wisbeach was coming up the stairs Gordon listened The footsteps 
paused on the first floor A letter for Flaxman They ascended, paused again on 
the second floor A letter for the engineer Gordon’s heart beat painfully A 
letter, please God, a letter* More footsteps Ascending or descending? They 
were coming nearer, surely! Ah, no, no 1 The sound grew fainter She was 
going down again The footsteps died away No letters 

He took up his pen again It was a quite futile gesture She hadn’t written 
after all* The little beast* He had not the smallest intention of doing any more 
work Indeed, he could not The disappointment had taken all the heart out of 
him Only five minutes ago his poem had still seemed to him a living thing, 
now he knew it unmistakably for the worthless tripe that it was With a kind of 
nervous disgust he bundled the scattered sheets together, stacked them m an 
untidy heap, and dumped them on the other side of the table, under the 
aspidistra He could not even bear to look at them any longer 

He got up It was too early to go to bed, at least, he was not m the mood for it 
He pined for a bit of amusement- something cheap and easy A seat in the 
pictures, cigarettes, beer Useless* No money to pay for any of them He would 
read King Lear and forget this filthy century Finally, however, it was The 
Adventures of Sherlock Holmes that he took from the mantelpiece Sherlock 
Holmes was his favourite of all books, because he knew it by heart The oil m 
the lamp was giving out and it was getting beastly cold Gordon dragged the 
quilt from his bed, wrapped it round his legs, and sat down to read His right 
elbow on the table, his hands under his coat to keep them warm, he read 
through ‘The Adventure of the Speckled Band ’ The little gas-mantle sighed 
above, the circular flame of the oil lamp burned low, a thin bracket of fire, 
giving out no more heat than a candle 

Down m Mrs Wisbeach’s lair the clock struck half past ten You could 
always hear it striking at night Ping-ping, ping-ping-a note of doom* The 
ticking of the alarm clock on the mantelpiece became audible to Gordon again, 
bringing with it the consciousness of the sinister passage of time He looked 
about him Another evening wasted Hours, days, years slipping by Night 
after night, always the same The lonely room, the womanless bed, dust, 
cigarette ash, the aspidistra leaves And he was thirty, nearly In sheer self- 
punishment he dragged forth a wad of London Pleasures , spread out the grimy 
sheets, and looked at them as one looks at a skull for a memento mon London 
Pleasures , by Gordon Comstock, author of Mice His magnum opus The fruit 
(fruit, indeed*) of two years’ work-that labyrinthine mess of words* And 
tonight’s achievement-two lines crossed out, two lines backward instead of 
forward 

The lamp made a sound like a tiny hiccup and went out With an effort 
Gordon stood up and flung the quilt back on to his bed. Better get to bed, 
perhaps, before it got any colder. He wandered over towards the bed But wait. 
Work tomorrow. Wind the clock, set the alarm Nothing accomplished, 
nothing done, has earned a night’s repose, 



59$ Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

It was some time before he could find the energy to undress For a quarter of 
an hour, perhaps, he lay on the bed fully dressed, his hands under his head 
There was a crack on the ceiling that resembled the map of Australia Gordon 
contrived to work off his shoes and socks without sitting up He held up one 
foot and looked at it A smallish, delicate foot Ineffectual, like his hands Also, 
it was very dirty It was nearly ten days since he had a bath Becoming ashamed 
of the dirtiness of his feet, he sagged into a sitting position and undressed 
himself, throwing his clothes on to the floor Then he turned out the gas and 
slid between the sheets, shuddering, for he was naked He always slept naked 
His last suit of pyjamas had gone west more than a year ago 
The clock downstairs struck eleven As the first coldness of the sheets wore 
off, Gordon’s mind went back to the poem he had begun that afternoon He 
repeated in a whisper the single stanza that was finished 

Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over 
The bending poplars, newly bare. 

And dark ribbons of the chimneys 
Veer downward, flicked by whips of air, 

Torn posters flutter 

The octosyllables flicked to and fro Click-click, click-click 1 The awful, 
mechanical emptiness of it appalled him It was like some futile little machine 
ticking over. Rhyme to rhyme, click-click, click-click Like the nodding of a 
clock-work doll Poetry 1 The last futility He lay awake, aware of his own 
futility, of his thirty years, of the blind alley into which he had led his life 
The clock struck twelve Gordon had stretched his legs out straight The 
bed had grown warm and comfortable The upturned beam of a car, 
somewhere m the street parallel to Willowbed Road, penetrated the blind and 
threw into silhouette a leaf of the aspidistra, shaped like Agamemnon’s sword 


3 


‘Gordon Comstock’ was a pretty bloody name, but then Gordon came from a 
pretty bloody family. The ‘Gordon’ part of it was Scotch, of course The 
prevalence of such names nowadays is merely a part of the Scotchification of 
England that has been going on these last fifty years ‘Gordon’, ‘Colin’, 
‘Malcolm’s ‘Donald’— these are the gifts of Scotland to the world, along with 
golf, whisky, porridge, and the works of Barrie and Stevenson 
« The Ccan^efcs belonged to the most dismal of all classes, the middle- 
middle class, the landless gentry. In their miserable poverty they had not even 
the sti^bish consolation of regarding themselves as an ‘old’ family fallen on 
evil days, for they were not an ‘old’ family at all, merely one of those families 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 599 

which rose on the wave of Victorian prosperity and then sank again faster than 
the wave itself They had had at most fifty years of comparative wealth, 
corresponding with the lifetime of Gordon’s grandfather, Samuel 
Comstock- Gran’pa Comstock, as Gordon was taught to call him, though the 
old man died four years before he was born 
Gran’pa Comstock was one of those people who even from the grave exert a 
powerful influence In life he was a tough old scoundrel He plundered the 
proletariat and the foreigner of fifty thousand pounds, he built himself a red 
brick mansion as durable as a pyramid, and he begot twelve children, of whom 
eleven survived Finally he died quite suddenly, of a cerebral haemorrhage. In 
Kensal Green his children placed over him a monolith with the following 
inscription 


IN EVER LOVING MEMORY OF 
SAMUEL EZEKIEL COMSTOCK, 

A FAITHFUL HUSBAND, A TENDER FATHER AND 
AN UPRIGHT AND GODLY MAN, 

WHO WAS BORN ON 9 JULY 1 828, AND 
DEPARTED THIS LIFE 5 SEPTEMBER 1901, 

THIS STONE IS ERECTED BY 
HIS SORROWING CHILDREN 
HE SLEEPS IN THE ARMS OF JESUS 

No need to repeat the blasphemous comments which everyone who had 
known Gran’pa Comstock made on that last sentence But it is worth pointing 
out that the chunk of granite on which it was inscribed weighed close on five 
tons and was quite certainly put there with the intention, though not the 
conscious intention, of making sure that Gran’pa Comstock shouldn’t get up 
from underneath it If you want to know what a dead man’s relatives really 
think of him, a good rough test is the weight of his tombstone 
The Comstocks, as Gordon knew them, were a peculiarly dull, shabby, 
dead-alive, ineffectual family They lacked vitality to an extent that was 
surprising That was Gran’pa Comstock’s doing, of course By the time when 
he died all his children were grown up and some of them were middle-aged, 
and he had long ago succeeded m crushing out of them any spirit they might 
ever have possessed. He had lain upon them as a garden roller lies upon daisies, 
and there was no chance of their flattened personalities ever expanding again 
One and all they turned out listless, gutless, unsuccessful sort of people None 
of the boys had proper professions, because Gran’pa Comstock had been at the 
greatest pains to drive all of them into professions for which they were totally 
unsuited Only one of them-John, Gordon’s father-had even braved Gran’pa 
Comstock to the extent of getting married during the latter’s lifetime. It was 
impossible to imagine any of them making any sort of mark in the world, or 
creating anything, or destroying anything, or being happy, or vividly 
unhappy, or fully alive, or even earning a decent income. They just drifted 
along m an atmosphere of serai-genteel failure They were one of those 



Soo Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

depressing families, so common among the middle-middle classes, m which 
nothing ever happens 

From his earliest childhood Gordon’s relatives had depressed him horribly 
When he was a little boy he still had great numbers of uncles and aunts living 
They were all more or less alike-grey, shabby, joyless people, all rather sickly 
in health and all perpetually harassed by money-worries which fizzled along 
without ever reaching the sensational explosion of bankruptcy It was 
noticeable even then that they had lost all impulse to reproduce themselves 
Really vital people, whether they have money or whether they haven’t, multiply 
almost as automatically as animals Gran’pa Comstock, for instance, himself 
one of a litter of twelve, had produced eleven progeny Yet all those eleven 
produced only two progeny between them, and those two-Gordon and his 
sister Julia-had produced, by 1934, not even one Gordon, last of the 
Comstocks, was born m 1905, an unintended child, and thereafter, in thirty 
long, long years, there was not a single birth in the family, only deaths And not 
only in the matter of marrying and begetting, but m every possible way, 
nothing ever happened m the Comstock family Every one of them seemed 
doomed, as though by a curse, to a dismal, shabby, hole-and-corner existence 
None of them ever did anything They were the kind of people who in every 
conceivable activity, even if it is only getting on to a bus, are automatically 
elbowed away from the heart of things All of them, of course, were hopeless 
fools about money Gran’pa Comstock had finally divided his money among 
them more or less equally, so that each received, after the sale of the red-brick 
mansion, round about five thousand pounds And no sooner was Gran’pa 
Comstock underground than they began to fritter their money away None of 
them had the guts to lose it m sensational ways such as squandering it on 
women or at the races, they simply dribbled it away and dribbled it away, the 
women in silly investments and the men in futile little business ventures that 
petered out after a year or two, leaving a net loss More than half of them went 
unmarried to their graves Some of the women did make rather undesirable 
middle-aged marriages after their father was dead, but the men, because of 
their incapacity to earn a proper living, were the kind who ‘can’t afford’ to 
marry None of them, except Gordon’s Aunt Angela, ever had so much as a 
home to call their own, they were the kind of people who live in godless ‘rooms’ 
and tomb-like boarding-houses And year after year they died off and died off, 
of dmgy but expensive little diseases that swallowed up the last penny of their 
capital One of the women, Gordon’s Aunt Charlotte, wandered off into the 
Mental Home at Clapham in 1916 The Mental Homes of England, how 
chock-a-block they stand! And it is above all derelict spinsters of the middle- 
classes who keep them going By 1934 only three of that generation survived, 
Aunt Charlotte already mentioned, and Aunt Angela, who by some happy 
chance had been induced to buy a house and a tiny annuity m 1912, and Uncle 
Waiter, who dingily existed cm the few hundred pounds that were left out of 
his five thousand and by running short-lived ‘agencies’ for this and that 
- grew up in the atmosphere of cut-down clothes and stewed neck of 

1 mutton. His father, like the other Comstocks, was a depressed and therefore 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 601 

depressing person, but he had some brains and a slight literary turn And 
seeing that his mind was of the literary type and he had a shrinking horror of 
anything to do with figures, it had seemed only natural to Gran’pa Comstock 
to make him into a chartered accountant So he practised, ineffectually, as a 
chartered accountant, and was always buying his way into partnerships which 
were dissolved after a year or two, and his income fluctuated, sometimes rising 
to five hundred a year and sometimes falling to two hundred, but always with a 
tendency to decrease He died in 1922, aged only fifty-six, but worn out-he 
had suffered from a kidney disease for a long time past 

Since the Comstocks were genteel as well as shabby, it was considered 
necessary to waste huge sums on Gordon’s ‘education’ What a fearful thing it 
is, this incubus of ‘education’ > It means that m order to send his son to the right 
kind of school (that is, a public school or an imitation of one) a middle-class 
man is obliged to live for years on end in a style that would be scorned by a 
jobbing plumber Gordon was sent to wretched, pretentious schools whose 
fees were round about £120 a year Even these fees, of course, meant fearful 
sacrifices at home Meanwhile Julia, who was five years older than he, received 
as nearly as possible no education at all She was, indeed, sent to one or two 
poor, dingy little boarding schools, but she was ‘taken away’ for good when she 
was sixteen Gordon was ‘the boy’ and Julia was ‘the girl’, and it seemed 
natural to everyone that ‘the girl’ should be sacrificed to ‘the boy’ Moreover, it 
had early been decided m the family that Gordon was ‘clever’ Gordon, with 
his wonderful ‘cleverness’, was to win scholarships, make a brilliant success in 
life, and retrieve the family fortunes-that was the theory, and no one believed 
in it more firmly than Julia Julia was a tall, ungainly girl, much taller than 
Gordon, with a thin face and a neck just a little too long-one of those girls who 
even at their most youthful remind one irresistibly of a goose But her nature 
was simple and affectionate She was a self-effacing, home-keeping, ironing, 
darning, and mending kind of girl, a natural spinster-soul Even at sixteen she 
had ‘old maid’ written all over her She idolized Gordon All through his 
childhood she watched over him, nursed him, spoiled him, went m rags so that 
he might have the right clothes to go to school m, saved up her wretched 
pocket-money to buy him Christmas presents and birthday presents And of 
course he repaid her, as soon as he was old enough, by despising her because 
she was not pretty and not ‘clever’ 

Even at the third-rate schools to which Gordon was sent nearly all the boys 
were richer than himself They soon found out his poverty, of course, and gave 
him hell because of it Probably the greatest cruelty one can inflict on a child is 
to send it to school among children richer than itself A child conscious of 
poverty will suffer snobbish agomes such as a grown-up person can scarcely 
imagine. In those days, especially at his preparatory school, Gordon’s life had 
been one long conspiracy to keep his end up and pretend that his parents were 
richer than they were Ah, the humiliations of those day si That awful business, 
for instance, at the beginning of each term, when you had to ‘give in’ to the 
headmaster, publicly, the money you had brought back with you; and the 
contemptuous, cruel sniggers from the other hoys when you didn’t ‘give ffi’ten 



6o2 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

bob or more And the time when the others found out that Gordon was 
wearing a ready-made suit which had cost thirty-five shillings' The times that 
Gordon dreaded most of all were when his parents came down to see him 
Gordon, m those days still a believer, used actually to pray that his parents 
wouldn’t come down to school His father, especially, was the kind of father 
you couldn’t help being ashamed of, a cadaverous, despondent man, with a bad 
stoop, his clothes dismally shabby and hopelessly out of date He carried about 
with him an atmosphere of failure, worry, and boredom And he had such a 
dreadful habit, when he was saying good-bye, of tipping Gordon half a crown 
right in front of the other boys, so that everyone could see that it was only half a 
crown and not, as it ought to have been, ten bob' Even twenty years afterwards 
the memory of that school made Gordon shudder 

The first effect of all this was to give him a crawling reverence for money In 
those days he actually hated his poverty-stricken relatives-his father and 
mother, Julia, everybody He hated them for their dingy homes, their 
dowdmess, their joyless attitude to life, their endless worrying and groaning 
over threepences and sixpences By far the commonest phrase in the Comstock 
household was, ‘We can’t afford it ’ In those days he longed for money as only 
a child can long Why shouldn’t one have decent clothes and plenty of sweets 
and go to the pictures as often as one wanted to^ He blamed his parents for 
their poverty as though they had been poor on purpose Why couldn’t they be 
like other boys’ parents? They preferred being poor, it seemed to him. That is 
how a child’s mind works 

But as he grew older he grew-not less unreasonable, exactly, but 
unreasonable m a different way By this time he had found his feet at school 
and was less violently oppressed He never was very successful at school-he 
did no work and won no scholarships-but he managed to develop his brain 
along the lines that suited it He read the books which the headmaster 
denounced from the pulpit, and developed unorthodox opinions about the C 
of E , patriotism, and the Old Boys’ tie Also he began writing poetry He even, 
after a year or two, began to send poems to the Athenaeum.^ the New Ajge, and 
the Weekly Westrmnster 3 but they were invariably rejected. Of courseThere 
were other boys of similartype with whom he associated Every public school 
has its small self-conscious intelligentsia And at that moment, in the years just 
after the War, England was so full of revolutionary opinion that even the 
public schools were infected by it The young, even those who had been too 
young to fi|ht, were in a bad temper with their elders, as well they might be, 
practically everyone with ajjyforams at all was for the momenta revolutionary 
Meanwhile the old-those over sixty, say-were running m circles like hens, 
squay^dng- about ^subversive ideas’ Gordon and his friends had quite an 
exdiing time with their ‘subversive ideas’. For a whole year they ran an 
unofea# monthly paper called the Bolshevik , duplicated with a jellygraph It 
advocated Socialism, free love, the dismemberment of the British Empire, the 
dhothlwbf' die Army and Navy, and so on and so forth. It was great fun Every 
ihtyhgentboy of sixteen is a Socialist, At that age one does not see the hook 


Keep the Aspidistra Flying 603 

In a crude; boyish way, he had begun to get the hang of this money-business 
At an earlier age than most people he grasped that all modern commerce is a 
swindle Curiously enough, it was the advertisements in the Underground 
stations that first brought it home to him He little knew, as the biographers 
say, that he himself would one day have a job m an advertising firm But there 
was more to it than the mere fact that business is a swindle What he realized, 
and more clearly as time went on, was that money- worship has been elevated 
into a religion Perhaps it is the only real religion-the only really felt 
religion-that is left to us Money is what God used to be Good and evil have 
no meaning any longer except failure and success Hence the profoundly 
significant phrase, to make good The decalogue has been reduced to two 
commandments One for the employers-the elect, the money-priesthood as it 
were- ‘Thou shalt make money’, the other for the employed-the slaves and 
underlings~‘Thou shalt not lose thy job ’ It was about this time that he came 
across The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists and read about the starving 
carpenter who pawns everything but sticks to his aspidistra The aspidistra 
became a sort of symbol for Gordon after that The aspidistra, flower of 
England* It ought to be on our coat of arms instead of the lion and the unicorn 
There will be no revolution in England while there are aspidistras in the 
windows * 

He did not hate and despise his relatives now-or not so much, at any rate 
They still depressed him greatly-those poor old withering aunts and uncles, of 
whom two or three had already died, his father, worn out and spiritless, his 
mother, faded, nervy, and ‘delicate’ (her lungs were none too strong), Julia, 
already, at one-and-twenty, a dutiful, resigned drudge who worked twelve 
hours a day and never had a decent frock But he grasped now what was the 
matter with them It was not merely the lack of money It was rather that, 
having no money, they still lived mentally in the money-world-the world m 
which money is virtue and poverty is crime It was not poverty but the down- 
draggmg of respectable poverty that had done for them Theyhad accepted the 
money-code, and by that code they were failures They had never had the 
sense to lash out and just live, money or no money, as the lower clatsses do How 
right the lower classes are* Hats off to the factory lad who with fourpence m the 
world puts his girl in the family way* At least he’s got blood and not money in 
his veins 

Gordon thought it all out, m the naive selfish manner of a boy There are two 
ways to live, he decided You can be rich, or you can deliberately refuse to be 
rich. You can possess money, or you can despise^noney, the one fatal thing is 
to worship money and fail to get it. He took it for granted that he himself would 
never tie able to make money. It hardly even occurred to him that he might 
have talents which could be turned to account That was what his 
schoolmasters had done for him; they had rubbed it into him that he was a 
seditious little nuisance and not likely to ‘succeed’ in life. He accepted this. 
Very weU, then, he would refuse the whole business of ‘succeeding*; he would 
make ith&s especial purpose not to ‘succeed’. Better to reign in hell than serve 



604 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

at sixteen, he knew which side he was on He was against the money-god and all 
his swinish priesthood He had declared war on money, but secretly, of course 
It was when he was seventeen that his father died, leaving about two 
hundred pounds Julia had been at work for some years now During 1918 and 
1919 she had worked in a Ggy^rnment office, and after that she took a course of 
cookery and got a job mV nasty, ladylike little teashop near Earl’s Court 
Underground Station She worked a seventy-two hour week and was given her 
lunch and tea and twenty-five shillings, out of this she contributed twelve 
shillings a week, often more, to the household expenses Obviously the best 
thing to do, now that Mr Comstock was dead, would have been to take Gordon 
away from school, find him a job, and let Julia have the two hundred pounds to 
set up a teashop of her own But here the habitual Comstock folly about money 
stepped m Neither Julia nor her mother would hear of Gordon leaving school 
With the strange idealistic snobbishness of the middle classes, they were 
willing to go to the workhouse sooner than let Gordon leave school before the 
statutory age of eighteen The two hundred pounds, or more than half of it, 
must be used in completing Gordon’s ‘education’ Gordon let them do it He 
had declared war on money but that did not prevent him from being damnably 
selfish Of course he dreaded this business of going to work What boy 
wouldn’t dread it? Pen-pushing in some filthy office- God 1 His uncles and 
aunts were already talking dismally about ‘getting Gordon settled in life’ 
They saw everything in terms of ‘good’ jobs Young Smith had got such a 
‘good’ job m a bank, and young Jones had got such a ‘good’ job in an insurance 
office It made him sick to hear them They seemed to want to see every young 
man in England nailed down in the coffin of a ‘good’ job 
Meanwhile, money had got to be earned Before her marriage Gordon’s 
mother had been a music teacher, and even since then she had taken pupils, 
sporadically, when the family were m lower water than usual She now decided 
that she would start giving lessons again It was fairly easy to get pupils m the 
suburbs-they were living m Acton-and with the music fees and Julia’s 
contribution they could probably ‘manage’ for the next year or two But the 
state of Mrs Comstock’s lungs was now something more than ‘delicate’ The 
doctor who had attended her husband before his death had put his stethoscope 
to her chest and looked serious He had told her to take care of herself, keep 
warm, eat nourishing food, and, above all, avoid fatigue The fidgeting, tiring 
job of giving piano lessons was, of course, the worst possible thing for her 
Gordon knew nothing of this. Julia knew, however It was a secret between the 
two women, carefully kept from Gordon. 

A year went by- Gordon spent it rather miserably, more and more 
embarrassed by his shabby clothes and lack of pocket-money, which made 
girls an object of terror to him However, the New Age accepted one of his 
poems; that year- Meanwhile, his mother sat on comfortless piano stools m 
drawing-rooms, giving lessons at two shillings an hour And then 
Gnrdotr left school, and fat interfering Uncle Walter, who had business 
connexions hi a small way, came forward and said that a friend of a friend of his 
Gordon ever such a ‘good’ job in the accounts department of a red 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 605 

lead firm It was really a splendid job-a wonderful opening for a young man If 
Gordon buckled to work in the right spirit he might be a Big Pot one of these 
days Gordon’s soul squirmed Suddenly, as weak people do, he stiffened, and, 
to the horror of the whole family, refused even to try for the job 

There were fearful rows, of course They could not understand him It 
seemed to them a kind of blasphemy to refuse such a ‘good 5 job when you got 
the chance of it, He kept reiterating that he didn’t want that kind of job Then 
what did he want? they all demanded He wanted to ‘write’, he told them 
sullenly But how could he possibly make a living by ‘writing’? they demanded 
again And of course he couldn’t answer At the back of his mind was the idea 
that he could somehow live by writing poetry, but that was too absurd even to 
be mentioned. But at any rate, he wasn’t going into business, into the money- 
world He would have a job, but not a ‘good’ job None of them had the vaguest 
idea what he meant His mother wept, even Julia ‘went for’ him, and all round 
him there were uncles and aunts (he still had six or seven of them left) feebly 
volleying and incompetently thundering And after three days a dreadful thing 
happened In the middle of supper his mother was seized by a violent fit of 
coughing, put her hand to her breast, fell forward, and began bleeding at the 
mouth 

Gordon was terrified His mother did not die, as it happened, but she looked 
deathly as they carried her upstairs Gordon rushed for the doctor For several 
days his mother lay at death’s door It was the draughty drawing-rooms and 
the trudging to and fro in all weathers that had done it Gordon hung 
helplessly about the house, a dreadful feeling of guilt mingling with his misery 
He did not exactly know but he half divined, that his mother had killed herself 
in order to pay his school fees After this he could not go on opposmg her any 
longer He went to Uncle Walter and told him that he would take that job in 
the red lead firm, if they would give it him So Uncle Walter spoke to his 
friend, and the friend spoke to his friend, and Gordon was sent for and 
interviewed by an old gentleman with badly fitting false teeth, and finally was 
given a job, on probation He started on twenty-five bob a week And with this 
firm he remamed six years 

They moved away from Acton and took a flat in a desolate red block of flats 
somewhere m the Paddington district Mrs Comstock had brought her piano, 
and when she had got some of her strength back she gave occasional lessons 
Gordon’s wages were gradually raised, and the three of them ‘managed’, more 
or less. It was Julia and Mrs Comstock who did most of the ‘managing’ 
Gordon still had a boy’s selfishness about money At the office he got on not 
absolutely badly It was said of him that he was worth his wages but wasn’t the 
type that Makes Good In a way the utter contempt that he had for his work 
made things easier for him He could put up with this meaningless office-life, 
because he never for an instant thought of it as permanent. Somehow, 
sometime, God knew how or when, he was going to break free of it. After all, 
there was always his ‘writing’ Some day, perhaps, he might be able to make a 
living of sorts by ‘writing’, and you’d feel you were free of the money-stink if 
yon werea ‘write#, would younot? The types he saw all round him,especiaily 



606 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

the older men, made him squirm That was what it meant to worship the 
money-god 1 To settle down, to Make Good, to sell your soul for a villa and an 
aspidistra 1 To turn into the typical little bowler-hatted sneak- Strube’s ‘little 
man’-the little docile cit who slips home by the six-fifteen to a supper of 
cottage pie and stewed tinned pears, half an hour’s listening-in to the 
BBC Symphony Concert, and then perhaps a spot of licit sexual mtercourse 
if his wife ‘feels m the mood ’ 1 What a fate 1 No, it isn’t like that that one was 
meant to live One’s got to get right out of it, out of the money-stink It was a 
kind of plot i hat he was nursing He was as though dedicated to this war against 
money But it was still a secret The people at the office never suspected him of 
unorthodox ideas They never even found out that he wrote poetry-not that 
there was much to find out, for m six years he had less than twenty poems 
printed m the magazines To look at, he was just the same as any other City 
clerk-just a soldier in the strap-hanging army that sways eastward at morning, 
westward at mght in the carnages of the Underground 

He was twenty-four when his mother died The family was breaking up 
Only four of the older generation of Comstocks were left now- Aunt Angela, 
Aunt Charlotte, Uncle Walter, and another uncle who died a year later 
Gordon and Julia gave up the flat Gordon took a furnished room in Doughty 
Street (he felt vaguely literary, living in Bloomsbury), and Julia moved to 
Earl’s Court, to be near the shop Julia was nearly thirty now, and looked much 
older. She was thinner than ever, though healthy enough, and there was grey 
in her hair She still worked twelve hours a day, and m six years her wages had 
only risen by ten shillings a week. The horribly ladylike lady who kept the 
teashop was a semi-friend as well as an employer, and thus could sweat and 
bully Julia to the tune of ‘dearest’ and ‘darling’ Four months after his 
mother’s death Gordon suddenly walked out of his job He gave the firm no 
reasons They imagined that he was going to ‘better himself, and-luckily, as it 
turned out-gave him quite good references. He had not even thought of 
looking for another job He wanted to bum his boats From now on he would 
breathe free air, free of the money-stink He had not consciously waited for his 
mother to die before doing this; still, it was his mother’s death that had nerved 
him to it. 

Of course there was another and more desolating row m what was left of the 
family. They thought Gordon must have gone mad. Over and over again he 
tried, quite vainly, to explain to them why he would not yield himself to the 
servitude of a ‘good’ job ‘But what are you going to live on? What are you 
going to five on?’ was what they all wailed at him He refused to think seriously 
about it. Of course, he still harboured the notion that he could make a living of 
sorts by ‘writing’. By this time he had got to know Ravelston, editor of 
Ayiiichrist? and Ravelston, besides printing his poems, managed to get him 
books to .review occasionally. His literary prospects were not so bleak as they 
hadhesaa six years ago. But still, it was not the desire to ‘write* that was his real 
rpodve. To get out of the money-world-that was what he wanted Vaguely he 
lopfeed fluward to some kind of moneyless, anchorite existence He had a 
feeing that if you genuinely despise money you can keep going somehow, like 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 607 

the birds of the air He forgot that the birds of the air don’t pay room-rent The 
poet starving in a garret-but starving, somehow, not uncomfortably- that was 
his vision of himself 

The next seven months were devastating They scared him and almost broke 
his spirit He learned what it means to live for weeks on end on bread and 
margarine, to try to ‘write’ when you are half starved, to pawn your clothes, to 
sneak trembling up the stairs when you owe three weeks’ rent and your 
landlady is listening for you Moreover, in those seven months he wrote 
pratically nothing The first effect of poverty is that it kills thought He 
grasped, as though it were a new discovery, that you do not escape from money 
merely by being moneyless On the contrary, you are the hopeless slave of 
money until you have enough of it to live on-a ‘competence’, as the beastly 
middle-class phrase goes Finally he was turned out of his room, after a vulgar 
row He was three days and four nights m the street It was bloody Three 
mornings, on the advice of another man he met on the Embankment, he spent 
in Billingsgate, helping to shove fish-barrows up the twisty little hills from 
Billingsgate into Eastcheap ‘Twopence an up’ was what you got, and the work 
knocked hell out of your thigh muscles There were crowds of people on the 
same job, and you had to wait your turn, you were lucky if you made eighteen- 
pence between four m the morning and nine After three days of it Gordon 
gave up What was the use? He was beaten There was nothing for it but to go 
back to his family, borrow some money, and find another job 

But now, of course, there was no job to be had. For months he lived by 
cadging on the family Julia kept him going till the last penny of her uny 
savings was gone It was abominable Here was the outcome of all his fine 
attitudes' He had renounced ambition, made war on money, and all it led to 
was cadging from his sister' And Julia, he knew, felt his failure far more than 
she felt the loss of her savings She had had such hopes of Gordon He alone of 
all the Comstocks had had it in him to ‘succeed’ Even now she believed that 
somehow, some day, he was going to retrieve the family fortunes He was so 
‘clever’-surely he could make money if he tried' For two whole months 
Gordon stayed with Aunt Angela m her little house at Highgate-poor, faded, 
mummified Aunt Angela, who even for herself had barely enough to eat All 
this time he searched desperately for work Uncle Walter could not help him 
His influence in the business world, never large, was now practically ml. At 
last, however, in a quite unexpected way, the luck turned A friend of a friend 
of Julia’s employer’s brother managed to get Gordon a job in the accounts 
department of the New Albion Publicity Company 

The New Albion was one of those publicity firms which have sprung up 
everywhere since the War-the fungi, as you might say, that sprout from a 
decaying capitalism It was a smallish rising firm and took every class of 
publicity it could get It designed a certain number of large-scale posters for 
oatmeal stout, self-raising flour, and so forth, but its main line was millinery 
and cosmetic advertisements m the women’s illustrated papers, besides minor 
ads in twopenny weeklies, such as Whiterose Pills for Female Disorders, Your 
Horoscope Cast by Professor Raratongo, The Seven Secrets of Venus, 1 New 



608 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

Hope for the Ruptured, Earn Five Pounds a Week in your Spare Tune, and 
Cyprolax Hair Lotion Banishes all Unpleasant Intruders There was a large 
staff of commercial artists, of course It was here that Gordon first made the 
acquaintance of Rosemary She was in the ‘studio’ and helped to design 
fashion plates It was a long time before he actually spoke to her At first he 
knew her merely as a remote personage, small, dark, with swift movements, 
distinctly attractive but rather intimidating When they passed one another m 
the corridors she eyed him ironically, as though she knew all about him and 
considered him a bit of a joke, nevertheless she seemed to look at him a little 
oftener than was necessary He had nothing to do with her side of the busmess 
He was m the accounts department, a mere clerk on three quid a week 

The interesting thing about the New Albion was that it was so completely 
modern in spirit There was hardly a soul in the firm who was not perfectly 
well aware that publicity-advertising-is the dirtiest ramp that capitalism has 
yet produced In the red lead firm there had still lmgered certain notions of 
commercial honour and usefulness But such things would have been laughed 
at in the New Albion Most of the employees were the hard-boiled, 
Americanized, go-getting type to whom nothing m the world is sacred, except 
money They had their cymcal code worked out The public are swine, 
advertising is the rattling of a stick mside a swill-bucket And yet beneath their 
cynicism there was the final naivety, the blind worship of the money-god 
Gordon studied them unobtrusively As before, he did his work passably well 
and his fellow-employees looked down on him Nothmg had changed m his 
inner mind He still despised and repudiated the money-code Somehow, 
sooner or later, he was going to escape from it, even now, after his first fiasco, 
he still plotted to escape He was m the money world, but not of it As for the 
types about him, the little bowler-hatted worms who never turned, and the go- 
getters, the American business-college gutter-crawlers, they rather amused 
him than not He liked studying their slavish keep-your-job mentality He was 
the chiel amang them takin’ notes 

One day a curious thing happened Somebody chanced to see a poem of 
Gordon’s m a magazine, and put it about that they ‘had a poet in the office’ Of 
course Gordon was laughed at, not ill-naturedly, by the other clerks They 
nicknamed him ‘the bard’ from that day forth But though amused, they were 
also family contemptuous It confirmed all their ideas about Gordon A fellow 
who wrote poetry wasn’t exactly the type to Make Good. But the thing had an 
unexpected sequel. About the tune when the clerks grew tired of chaffing 
Cxordon, Mr Erskme, the managing director, who had hitherto taken only the 
minimum notice of him, sent for him and interviewed him 

Mr Brskine was a large, slow-moving man with a broad, healthy, 
expressionless face. From his appearance and the slowness of his speech you 
would haw guessed with confidence that he had something to do with either 
Igrknilture or cattle-breeding His wits were as slow as his movements, and he 
wm the kind of man who never hears of anything until everybody else has 
Stopped talking about it. How such a man came to be in charge of an 
adYertisiug agency, only the strange gods of capitalism know But he was quite 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 609 

a likeable person He had not that smffish, buttoned-up spirit that usually goes 
with an ability to make money And in a way his fat-wittedness stood him in 
good stead Being insensible to popular prejudice, he could assess people on 
their merits, consequently, he was rather good at choosing talented employees 
The news that Gordon had written poems, so far from shocking him, vaguely 
impressed him They wanted literary talents m the New Albion Having sent 
for Gordon, he studied him in a somnolent, sidelong way and asked him a 
number of inconclusive questions He never listened to Gordon’s answers, but 
punctuated his questions with a noise that sounded like *Hm, hm, hm ’ Wrote 
poetry, did he? Oh yes? Hm And had it printed in the papers? Hm, hm 
Suppose they paid you for that kind of thing? Not much, eh? No, suppose not 
Hm, hm Poetry? Hm A bit difficult, that must be Getting the lines the same 
length, and all that Hm, hm Write anything else? Stories, and so forth? Hm 
Oh yes? Very interesting Hm 1 

Then, without further questions, he promoted Gordon to a special post as 
secretary-m effect, apprentice-to Mr Clew, the New Albion’s head 
copywriter Like every other advertising agency, the New Albion was 
constantly in search of copywriters with a touch of imagination It is a curious 
fact, but it is much easier to find competent draughtsmen than to find people 
who can think of slogans like ‘Q T Sauce keeps Hubby Smiling’ and ‘Kiddies 
clamour for their Breakfast Crisps’ Gordon’s wages were not raised for the 
moment, but the firm had their eye on him With luck he might be a full- 
fledged copywriter in a year’s time It was an unmistakable chance to Make 
Good 

For six months he was working with Mr Clew Mr Clew was a harassed man 
of about forty, with wiry hair into which he often plunged his fingers He 
worked in a stuffy little office whose walls were entirely papered with his past 
triumphs m the form of posters He took Gordon under his wing in a friendly 
way, showed him the ropes, and was even ready to listen to his suggestions. At 
that time they were working on a line of magazine ads for April Dew, the great 
new deodorant which the Queen of Sheba Toilet Requisites Co (this was 
Flaxman’s firm, curiously enough) were putting on the market Gordon 
started on the job with secret loathing. But now there was a quite unexpected 
development It was that Gordon showed, almost from the start, a remarkable 
talent for copywriting He could compose an ad as though he had been born to 
it The vivid phrase that sticks and rankles, the neat little para that packs a 
world of lies into a hundred words-they came to him almost unsought He had 
always had a gift for words, but thus was the first time he had used it 
successfully Mr Clew thought him very promising Gordon watched his own 
development, first with surprise, then with amusement, and finally with a kind 
of horror This, then, was what he was coming to 1 Writing lies to tickle the 
money out of fools’ pockets 1 There was a beastly irony, too, in the fact that he, 
who wanted to be a ‘writer’, should score his sole success in writing ads for 
deodorants. However, that was less unusual than he imagined Most 
copywriters, they say, are novelists manqu&s> or is it the other way about? 

The Queen of Sheba were very pleased with their ads, Mr Erskine also was 



6 io Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

pleased Gordon’s wages were raised by ten shillings a week And it was now 
that Gordon grew frightened Money was getting him after all He was sliding 
down, down, into the money-sty A little more and he would be stuck in it for 
life It is queer how these things happen You set your face against success, you 
swear never to Make Good-you honestly believe that you couldn’t Make 
Good even if you wanted to, and then something happens along, some mere 
chance, and you find yourself Making Good almost automatically He saw that 
now or never was the. time to escape He had got to get out of lt-out of the 
money-world, irrevocably, before he was too far involved 
But this time he wasn’t going to be starved into submission He went to 
Ravelston and asked his help He told him that he wanted some kind of job, not 
a ‘good’ job, but a job that would keep his body without wholly buying his 
soul Ravelston understood perfectly The distinction between a job and a 
‘good’ job did not have to be explained to him, nor did he point out to Gordon 
the folly of what he was doing That was the great thing about Ravelston He 
could always see another person’s point of view It was having money that did 
it, no doubt, for the rich can afford to be intelligent Moreover, being rich 
himself, he could find jobs for other people After only a fortnight he told 
Gordon of something that might suit him A Mr McKechme, a rather 
dilapidated second-hand bookseller with whom Ravelston dealt occasionally, 
was looking for an assistant He did not want a trained assistant who would 
expect full wages, he wanted somebody who looked like a gentleman and could 
talk about books-somebody to impress the more bookish customers It was the 
very reverse of a ‘good’ job The hours were long, the pay was wretched- two 
pounds a week-and there was no chance of advancement It was a blind-alley 
job And, of course, a blind-alley job was the very thing Gordon was looking 
for He went and saw Mr McKechme, a sleepy, bemgn old Scotchman with a 
red nose and a white beard stained by snuff, and was taken on without demur 
At this time, too, his volume of poems. Mice, was going to press The seventh 
publisher to whom he had sent it had accepted it Gordon did not know that 
this was Ravelston’s doing Ravelston was a personal friend of the pubhsher 
He was always arranging this kind of thing, stealthily, for obscure poets 
Gordon thought the future was opening before him He was a made man-or, 
by Smilesian, aspidistral standards, wranade. 

He gave a month’s notice at the office It was a painful business altogether 
Julia, of course, was more distressed than ever at this second abandonment of a 
‘good’ job. By this time Gordon had got to know Rosemary She did not try to 
prevent him from throwing up his job It was against her code to 
mterfere-‘You’ve got to live your own life,’ was always her attitude But she 
did not in the least understand why he was doing it. The thing that most upset 
him, curiously enough, was his interview with Mr Erskme Mr Erskme was 
genuinely kind. He did not want Gordon to leave the firm, and said so frankly. 
W!tb « sort ofielephantine politeness he refrained from calling Gordon a young 
foot He did, however, ask him why he was leaving Somehow, Gordon could 
not bring himself to avoid answering or to say-the only thing Mr Erskme 
would have understood-that he was going after a better-paid job He blurted 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 611 

out shamefacedly that he ‘didn’t think business suited him’ and that he 
‘wanted to go m for writing’ Mr Erskme was noncommittal Writing, eh? Hm 
Much money in that sort of thing nowadays? Not much, eh? Hm No, suppose 
not Hm Gordon, feeling and looking ridiculous, mumbled that he had ‘got a 
book just coming out’ A book of poems, he added with difficulty m 
pronouncing the word Mr Erskme regarded him sidelong before remarking 

‘Poetry, eh? Hm Poetry? Make a living out of that sort of thing, do you 
think?’ 

‘Well-not a living, exactly But it would help ’ 

‘Hm-well' You know best, I expect If you want a job any time, come back 
to us I dare say we could find room for you We can do with your sort here 
Don’t forget ’ 

Gordon left with a hateful feeling of having behaved perversely and 
ungratefully But he had got to do it, he had got to get out of the money-world 
It was queer All over England young men were eating their hearts out for lack 
of jobs, and here was he, Gordon, to whom the very word ‘job’ was faintly 
nauseous, having jobs thrust unwanted upon him It was an example of the fact 
that you can get anything m this world if you genuinely don’t want it 
Moreover, Mr Erskme’s words stuck in his mind Probably he had meant what 
he said Probably there would be a job waiting for Gordon if he chose to go 
back So his boats were only half burned The New Albion was a doom before 
him as well as behind 

But how happy had he been, just at first, in Mr McKechme’s bookshop' For 
a little while-a very little while-he had the illusion of being really out of the 
money-world Of course the book-trade was a swindle, like all other trades, but 
how different a swindle' Here was no hustling and Making Good, no gutter- 
crawling No go-getter could put up for ten minutes with the stagnant air of 
the book-trade As for the work, it was very simple It was mainly a question of 
being in the shop ten hours a day Mr McKechnie wasn’t a bad old stick He 
was a Scotchman, of course, but Scottish is as Scottish does At any rate he was 
reasonably free from avarice-his most distinctive trait seemed to be laziness. 
He was also a teetotaller and belonged to some Nonconformist sect or other, 
but this did not affect Gordon Gordon had been at the shop about a month 
when Mice was published No less than thirteen papers reviewed it' And The 
Times Lit Supp said that it showed ‘exceptional promise’. It was not till 
months later that he realized what a hopeless failure Mice had really been. 

And it was only now, when he was down to two quid a week and had 
practically cut himself off from the prospect of earning more, that he grasped 
the real nature of the battle he was fighting. The devil of it is that the glow of 
renunciation never lasts Life on two quid a week ceases to be a heroic gesture 
and becomes a dingy habit Failure is as great a swindle as success He had 
thrown up his ‘good’ job and renounced ‘good’ jobs for ever. Well, that was 
necessary He did not want to go back on it. But it was no use pretending that 
because his poverty was self-imposed he had escaped the ills that poverty drags 
in its tram. It was not a question of hardship. You don’t suffer real physical 
hardship on two quid a week, and if you did it wouldn’t matter. It is in the brain 



6 j 2 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

and the soul that lack of money damages you Mental deadness, spiritual 
squalor-they seem to descend upon you inescapably when your income drops 
below a certain point Faith, hope, money-only a saint could have the first two 
without having the third 

He was growing more mature Twenty-seven, twenty-eight, twenty-nine 
He had reached the age when the future ceases to be a rosy blur and becomes 
actual and menacing The spectacle of his surviving relatives depressed him 
more and more As he grew older he felt himself more akin to them That was 
the way he was going 1 A few years more, and he would be like that, just like 
that 1 He felt this even with Julia, whom he saw oftener than his uncle and aunt 
In spite of various resolves never to do it again, he still borrowed money off 
Julia periodically Julia’s hair was greying fast, there was a deep line scored 
down each of her thm red cheeks She had settled her life into a routine in 
which she was not unhappy There was her work at the shop, her ‘sewing’ at 
nights m her Earl’s Court bed-sitting-room (second floor, back, nine bob a 
week unfurnished), her occasional forgathermgs with spinster friends as lonely 
as herself It was the typical submerged life of the penniless unmarried woman, 
she accepted it, hardly realizing that her destiny could ever have been 
different Yet m her way she suffered, more for Gordon than for herself The 
gradual decay of the family, the way they had died off and died off and left 
nothing behind, was a sort of tragedy in her mind Money, money 1 ‘None of us 
ever seems to make any money!’ was her perpetual lament And of them all, 
Gordon alone had had the chance to make money, and Gordon had chosen not 
to He was sinking effortless into the same rut of poverty as the others After 
the first row was over, she was too decent to ‘go for’ him again because he had 
thrown up his job at the New Albion But his motives were quite meaningless 
to her In her wordless feminine way she knew that the sin against money is the 
ultimate sm 

And as for Aunt Angela and Uncle Walter-oh dear, oh dear 1 What a couple 1 
It made Gordon feel ten years older every time he looked at them 

Uncle Walter, for example Uncle Walter was very depressing He was 
sixty-seven, and what with his various ‘agencies’ and the dwindling remnants 
of his patrimony his income might have been nearly three pounds a week He 
had a tmy little cabin of an office off Cursitor Street, and he lived m a very 
cheap boarding-house m Holland Park That was quite according to 
precedent; all the Comstock men drifted naturally into boarding-houses 
When you looked at poor old uncle, with his large tremulous belly, his 
bronchitic voice, his broad, pale, timidly pompous face, rather like Sargent’s 
portrait of Henry James, his entirely hairless head, his pale, pouchy eyes, and 
his ever-drooping moustache, to which he tried vainly to give an upward 
twirl-when you looked at him, you found it totally impossible to believe that 
he had ever been young Was it conceivable that such a being had ever felt life 
tingle in to veins? Had he ever climbed a tree, taken a header off a spring- 
board, or been in love** Had he ever had a brain in working order? Even back in 
the early nineties, when he was arithmetically young, had he ever made any 
ttod of atab at life? A few furtive half-hearted frolics, perhaps. A few whiskies 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 613 

in dull bars, a visit or two to the Empire promenade, a little whormg on the 
Q T , the sort of dingy, drabby fornications that you can imagine happening 
between Egyptian mummies after the museum is closed for the mght And 
after that the long, long quiet years of business failure, loneliness, and 
stagnation in godless boarding-houses 

And yet uncle m his old age was probably not unhappy He had one hobby of 
never-failing interest, and that was his diseases He suffered, by his own 
account, from every disease m the medical dictionary, and was never weary of 
talking about them Indeed, it seemed to Gordon that none of the people in his 
uncle’s boardmg-house-he had been there occasionally-ever did talk about 
anything except their diseases All over the darkish drawing-room, ageing, 
discoloured people sat about m couples, discussing symptoms Their 
conversation was like the dripping of stalactite to stalagmite Drip, drip ‘How 
is your lumbago^’ says stalactite to stalagmite ‘I find my Kruschen Salts are 
doing me good,’ says stalagmite to stalactite Drip, drip, drip 

And then there was Aunt Angela, aged sixty-mne Gordon tried not even to 
think of Aunt Angela oftener than he could help 

Poor, dear, good, kind, depressing Aunt Angela 1 

Poor, shrivelled, parchment-yellow, skm-and-bone Aunt Angela 1 There in 
her miserable little semi-detached house m Highgate-Bnarbrae, its name 
was-there in her palace in the northern mountains, there dwelleth she, Angela 
the Ever-virgm, of whom no man either living or among the shades can say 
truly that upon her lips he hath pressed the dear caresses of a lover All alone 
she dwelleth, and all day long she fareth to and fro, and m her hand is the 
feather-mop fashioned from the tail feathers of the contumacious turkey, and 
with it she polisheth the dark-leaved aspidistras and fiicketh the hated dust 
from the resplendent never-to-be-used Crown Derby china tea-service And 
ever and anon she comforteth her dear heart with draughts of the dark brown 
tea, both Flowery Orange and Pekoe Points, which the small-bearded sons of 
Coromandel have ferried to her across the wine-dark sea Poor, dear, good, 
kind, but on the whole unloveable Aunt Angela 1 Her annuity was ninety-eight 
pounds a year (thirty-eight bob a week, but she retamed a middle-class habit of 
thinking of her income as a yearly and not weekly thing), and out of that, 
twelve and sixpence a week went on house rates She would probably have 
starved occasionally if Julia had not smuggled her packets of cakes and bread 
and butter from the shop-always, of course, presented as ‘Just a few little 
things that it seemed a pity to throw away’, with the solemn pretence that Aunt 
Angela didn’t really need them 

Yet she too had her pleasures, poor old aunty She had become a great novel- 
reader in her old age, the public library being only ten minutes’ walk from 
Bnarbrae During his lifetime, on some whim or other, Gran’pa Comstock had 
forbidden his daughters to read novels Consequently, having only begun to 
read novels in 1902, Aunt Angela was always a couple of decades behind the 
current mode in fiction. But she plodded along in the rear, faint yet pursuing. 
In the nineteen-hundreds she was still reading Rhoda Broughton and Mrs 
Henry Wood, In the War years she discovered Hall Came and Mrs Humphry 



6 i<j Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

Ward In the nineteen-twenties she was reading Silas Hocking and H Seton 
Merriman, and by the nineteen-thirties she had almost, but not quite, caught 
up with W B Maxwell and William J Locke Further she would never get As 
for the post-War novelists, she had heard of them afar off, with their 
immorality and their blasphemies and their devastating ‘cleverness’ But she 
would never live to read them Walpole we know, and Hichens we read, but 
Hemingway, who are you? 

Well, this was 1934, and that was what was left of the Comstock family 
Uncle Walter, with his ‘agencies’ and his diseases Aunt Angela, dusting the 
Crown Derby china tea-service in Briarbrae Aunt Charlotte, still preserving a 
vague vegetable existence in the Mental Home Julia, working a seventy-two- 
hour week and doing her ‘sewing’ at nights by the tiny gas-fire in her bed- 
sittmg-room Gordon, nearly thirty, earning two quid a week m a fool’s job, 
and struggling, as the sole demonstrable object of his existence, with a dreadful 
book that never got any further 

Possibly there were some other, more distantly related Comstocks, for 
Gran’pa Comstock had been one of a family of twelve But if any survived they 
had grown rich and lost touch with their poor relations, for money is thicker 
than blood As for Gordon’s branch of the family, the combined income of the 
five of them, allowing for the lump sum that had been paid down when Aunt 
Charlotte entered the Mental Home, might have been six hundred a year 
Their combined ages were two hundred and sixty-three years None of them 
had ever been out of England, fought m a war, been in prison, ridden a horse, 
travelled m an aeroplane, got married, or given birth to a child There seemed 
no reason why they should not continue in the same style until they died Year 
in, year out, nothing ever happened in the Comstock family. 


4 


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over 
The bending poplars, newly bare 

As a matter of fact, though, there was not a breath of wind that afternoon It 
was almost as mild as spring Gordon repeated to himself the poem he had 
begun yesterday, in a cadenced whisper, simply for the pleasure of the sound 
of it. He was pleased with the poem at this moment It was a good poem-or 
would be when it was finished, anyway He had forgotten that last night it had 
almost made him sick. 

The plane trees brooded motionless, dimmed by faint wreaths of mist A 
tram boomed in the valley far below. Gordon walked up Malkin Hill, rustling 
instep-deep through the dry, drifted leaves. All down the pavement they were 
s®tc^,<3mkly and golden, like the rustling flakes of some American breakfast 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 6 15 

cereal, as though the queen of Brobdmgnag had upset her packet of Truweet 
Breakfast Crisps down the hillside 

Jolly, the windless winter days’ Best time of all the year-or so Gordon 
thought at this moment He was as happy as you can be when you haven’t 
smoked all day and have only three-halfpence and a Joey m the world This 
was Thursday, early-closing day and Gordon’s afternoon off He was going to 
the house of Paul Dormg, the critic, who lived m Coleridge Grove and gave 
literary tea-parties 

It had taken him an hour or more to get himself ready Social life is so 
complicated when your income is two qmd a week He had had a painful shave 
in cold water immediately after dinner He had put on his best suit-three years 
old but just passable when he remembered to press the trousers under his 
mattress He had turned his collar inside out and tied his tie so that the torn 
place didn’t show With the pomt of a match he had scraped enough blacking 
from the tin to polish his shoes He had even borrowed a needle from 
Lorenheim and darned his socks-a tedious job, but better than inking the 
places where your ankle shows through Also he had procured an empty Gold 
Flake packet and put into it a single cigarette extracted from the penny-m-the- 
slot-machme That was just for the look of the thing You can’t, of course, go 
to other people’s houses with no cigarettes But if you have even one it’s all 
right, because when people see one cigarette m a packet they assume that the 
packet has been full It is fairly easy to pass the thing off as an accident 
‘Have a cigarette?’ you say casually to someone 
‘Oh-thanks ’ 

You push the packet open and then register surprise ‘Hell* I’m down to my 
last And I could have sworn I had a full packet ’ 

‘Oh, I won’t take your last Have one of mine,’ says the other 
‘Oh-thanks ’ 

And after that, of course, your host and hostess press cigarettes upon you 
But you must have one cigarette, just for honour’s sake 
Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over He would finish that poem presently. 
He could finish it whenever he chose It was queer, how the mere prospect of 
going to a literary tea-party bucked him up When your income is two quid a 
week you at least aren’t jaded by too much human contact Even to see the 
inside of somebody else’s house is a kind of treat A padded armchair under 
your bum, and tea and cigarettes and the smell of women-you learn to 
appreciate such things when you are starved of them In practice, though, 
Daring’s parties never in the least resembled what Gordon looked forward 
to Those wonderful, witty, erudite conversations that he imagined 
beforehand-they never happened or began to happen Indeed there was never 
anything that could properly be called conversation at all, only the stupid 
clacking that goes on at parties everywhere, in Hampstead or Hong Kong. No 
one really worth meeting ever came to Donng’s parties Donng was such a 
very mangy lion himself that his followers were hardly even worthy to be called 
jackals Quite half of them Were those hen-witted middle-aged women who 
have lately capped from good Christian homes and are trying to be literary 



616 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

The star exhibits were troops of bright young things who dropped in for half 
an hour, formed circles of their own, and talked sniggermgly about the other 
bright young things to whom they referred by nicknames For the most part 
Gordon found himself hanging about on the edges of conversations Donng 
was kind in a slapdash way and introduced him to everybody as ‘Gordon 
Comstock-yow know, the poet He wrote that dashed clever book of poems 
called Mice You know ’ But Gordon had never yet encountered anybody who 
did know The bright young things summed him up at a glance and ignored 
him He was thirtyish, moth-eaten, and obviously penniless And yet, in spite 
of the invariable disappointment, how eagerly he looked forward to those 
literary tea-parties' They were a break in his loneliness, anyway. That is the 
devilish thing about poverty, the ever-recurrent thing-lonelmess Day after 
day with never an intelligent person to talk to, night after night back to your 
godless room, always alone Perhaps it sounds rather fun if you are rich and 
sought-after, but how different it is when you do it from necessity' 

Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over A stream of cars hummed easily up 
the hill Gordon eyed them without envy Who wants a car, anyway 5 The pmk 
doll-faces of upper-class women gazed at him through the car window Bloody 
mt-witted lapdogs Pampered bitches dozing on their chains Better the lone 
wolf than the cringing dogs. He thought of the Tube stations at early morning 
The black hordes of clerks scurrying underground like ants into a hole, swarms 
of little ant-like men, each with dispatch-case m right hand, newspaper m left 
hand, and the fear of the sack like a maggot in his heart How it eats at them, 
that secret fear' Especially on winter days, when they hear the menace of the 
wind Winter, the sack, the workhouse, the Embankment benches' Ah' 

Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over 
The bending poplars, newly bare. 

And the dark ribbons of the chimneys 
Veer downward, flicked by whips of air, 

Torn posters flutter, Coldly sound 

The boom of trams and the rattle of hooves. 

And the clerks who hurry to the station 
Look, shuddering, over die eastern rooves, 

Thmkmg- 

What do they think 5 Winter’s coming Is my >ob safe 5 The sack means the 
workhouse Circumcise ye your foreskins, saith the Lord Suck the blacking 
off the boss’s boots. Yes 1 


Thinking each one, ‘Here comes the winter 1 
Please God I keep my job this year 1 ’ 

And bleakly, as the cold strikes through 
Their entrails like an icy spear, 

They thmk- 

‘Think' again. No matter. What do they think 5 Money, money! Rent, rates, 
taxes, school bills, season tickets, boots for the children. And the life insurance 
pofey and the skivvy’s wages And, my God, suppose the wife gets m the 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 6 17 

family way again 1 And did I laugh loud enough when the boss made that joke 
yesterday? And the next instalment on the vacuum cleaner 

Neatly, taking a pleasure in his neatness, with the sensation of dropping 
piece after piece of a jigsaw puzzle into place, he fashioned another stanza 

They think of rent, rates, season tickets, 

Insurance, coal, the skivvy’s wages, 

Boots, school bills, and the next instalment 
Upon the two twin beds from Drage’s 

Not bad, not bad at all Finish it presently Four or five more stanzas 
Ravelston would print it 

A starling sat in the naked boughs of a plane tree, crooning self-pitifully as 
starlings do on warm winter days when they believe spring is m the air At the 
foot of the tree a huge sandy cat sat motionless, mouth open, gazing upwards 
with rapt desire, plainly expecting that the starling would drop into its mouth 
Gordon repeated to himself the four finished stanzas of his poem It was good 
Why had he thought last night that it was mechanical, weak, and empty? He 
was a poet He walked more upright, arrogantly almost, with the pride of a 
poet Gordon Comstock, author of Mice ‘Of exceptional promise,’ The Times 
Lit Supp had said Author also of London Pleasures For that too would be 
finished qmte soon He knew now that he could finish it when he chose. Why 
had he ever despaired of it? Three months it might take, soon enough to come 
out in the summer In his mind’s eye he saw the ‘slim’ white buckram shape of 
London Pleasures , the excellent paper, the wide margins, the good Caslon type, 
the refined dust-jacket and the reviews m all the best papers, ‘An outstandmg 
achievement’- The Times Lit Supp ‘A welcome relief from the Sitwell 
school’ - Scrutiny 

Coleridge Grove was a damp, shadowy, secluded road, a blind alley and 
therefore void of traffic Literary associations of the wrong kind (Coleridge was 
rumoured to have lived there for six weeks in the summer of 1821) hung heavy 
upon it You could not look at its antique decaying houses, standing back from 
the road in dank gardens under heavy trees, without feeling an atmosphere of 
outmoded ‘culture’ envelop you In some of those houses, undoubtedly, 
Browning Societies still flourished, and ladies m art serge sat at the feet of 
extinct poets talking about Swinburne and Walter Pater In spring the gardens 
were sprinkled with purple and yellow crocuses, and later with harebells, 
springing up in little Wendy rings among the anaemic grass, and even the 
trees, it seemed to Gordon, played up to their environment and twisted 
themselves into whimsy Rackhamesque attitudes It was queer that a 
prosperous hack cntic like Paul Donng should live in such a place For During 
was an astonishmgly bad critic He reviewed novels for the Sunday Post and 
discovered the great English novel with Walpolean regularity once a fortnight 
You would have expected him to live in a flat on Hyde Park Corner, Perhaps it 
was a kind of penance that he had imposed upon himself, as though by hvingin 
the refined discomfort of Coleridge Grove he propitiated the injured gods of 
literature -1 

Gordon came round the »co^^r, tuimffi^ in his mind a line from London 



Sj 8 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

Pleasures And then suddenly he stopped short There was something wrong 
about the look of the Dormgs’ gate What was it? Ah, of coursei There were no 
cars waiting outside 

He paused, walked on a step or two, and stopped again, like a dog that smells 
danger It was all wrong There ought to be some cars There were always quite 
a lot of people at the Dormgs’ parties, and half of them came m cars Why had 
nobody else arrived’ Could he be too early’ But no 1 They had said half past 
three and it was at least twenty to four 

He hastened towards the gate Already he felt practically sure that the party 
had been put off A chill like the shadow of a cloud had fallen across him 
Suppose the Dormgs weren’t at home 1 Suppose the party had been put off' 
And this thought, though it dismayed him, did not strike him as m the least 
improbable It was his special bugbear, the especial childish dread he carried 
about with him, to be invited to people’s houses and then find them not at 
home Even when there was no doubt about the invitation he always half 
expected that there would be some hitch or other He was never quite certain 
of his welcome He took it for granted that people would snub him and forget 
about him Why not, indeed’ He had no money When you have no money 
your life is one long series of snubs 

He swung the iron gate open It creaked with a lonely sound The dank 
mossy path was bordered with chunks of some Rackhamesque pinkish stone 
Gordon inspected the house-front narrowly He was so used to this kind of 
thing He had developed a sort of Sherlock Holmes technique for finding out 
whether a house was inhabited or not Ah 1 Not much doubt about it this time 
The house had a deserted look No smoke coming from the chimneys, no 
windows lighted It must be getting darkish mdoors-surely they would have 
lighted the lamps’ And there was not a smgle footmark on the steps, that 
settled it Nevertheless with a sort of desperate hope he tugged at the bell An 
old-fashioned wire bell, of course In Coleridge Grove it would have been 
considered low and unliterary to have an electric bell 

Clang, clang, clang 1 went the bell 

Gordon’s last hope vanished No mistaking the hollow clangour of a bell 
echoing through an empty house He seized the handle again and gave it a 
wrench that almost broke the wire A frightful, clamorous peal answered him 
But it was useless, quite useless Not a foot stirred within Even the servants 
were out- At this moment he became aware of a lace cap, some dark hair, and a 
pair of youthful eyes regarding him furtively from the basement of the house 
next door. It was a servant-girl who had come out to see what all the noise was 
about- She caught his eye and gazed into the middle distance He looked a fool 
and knew it* One always does look a fool when one rings the bell of an empty 
house. And suddenly it came to him that that girl knew all about him-knew 
that theparty had been put off and that everyone except Gordon had been told 
of itT-knew that it was because he had no money that he wasn’t worth the 
trouble of telling She knew. Servants always know 

He turned and made for the gate Under the servant’s eye he had to stroll 
casually away, as though this were a small disappointment that scarcely 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 619 

mattered But he was trembling so with anger that it was difficult to control his 
movements The sods 1 The bloody sods 1 To have played a trick like that on 
him 1 To have invited him, and then changed the day and not even bothered to 
tell him 1 There might be other explanations -he just refused to think of them 
The sods, the bloody sods 1 His eye fell upon one of the Rackhamesque chunks 
of stone How he’d love to pick that thing up and bash it through the window* 
He grasped the rusty gate-bar so hard that he hurt his hand and almost tore it 
The physical pam did him good It counteracted the agony at his heart It was 
not merely that he had been cheated of an evening spent m human company, 
though that was much It was the feeling of helplessness, of insignificance, of 
being set aside, ignored-a creature not worth worrying about They’d 
changed the day and hadn’t even bothered to tell him Told everybody else, 
but not him That’s how people treat you when you’ve no money 1 Just 
wantonly, cold-bloodedly insult you It was likely enough, indeed, that the 
Dorings’ had honestly forgotten, meaning no harm, it was even possible that 
he himself had mistaken the date But no* He wouldn’t think of it The 
Dorings’ had done it on purpose Of course they had done it on purpose* Just 
hadn’t troubled to tell him, because he had no money and consequently didn’t 
matter The sods* 

He walked rapidly away There was a sharp pam in his breast Human 
contact, human voices* But what was the good of wishing? He’d have to spend 
the evening alone, as usual His friends were so few and lived so far away 
Rosemary would still be at work, besides, she lived at the back of beyond, m 
West Kensington, in a women’s hostel guarded by female dragons Ravelston 
lived nearer, m the Regent’s Park district But Ravelston was a rich man and 
had many engagements, the chances were always against his being at home 
Gordon could not even ring him up, because he hadn’t the necessary two 
pennies, only three halfpence and the Joey Besides, how could he go and see 
Ravelston when he had no money? Ravelston would be sure to say ‘Let’s go to 
a pub,’ or something* He couldn’t let Ravelston pay for his drinks His 
friendship with Ravelston was only possible on the understanding that he paid 
his share of everything 

He took out his single cigarette and lighted it It gave him no pleasure to 
smoke, walking fast, it was a mere reckless gesture He did not take much 
notice of where he was going All he wanted was to tire himself, to walk and 
walk till the stupid physical fatigue had obliterated the Dorings’ snub He 
moved roughly southward-through the wastes of Camden Town, down 
Tottenham Court Road It had been dark for some time now He crossed 
Oxford Street, threaded through Covent Garden, found himself in the Strand, 
and crossed the river by Waterloo Bridge, With night the cold had descended. 
As he walked his anger grew less violent, but his mood could not 
fundamentally improve There was a thought that kept haunting him*-a 
thought from which he fled, but which was not to be escaped. It was the 
thought of his poems His empty, silly, futile poems* How could he ever have 
believed in them? To think that actually he had imagined, so short a tune ago, 
that even London Pteasw'esjmgkt one day come to something! It made him sick 



5 20 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

to think of his poems now It was like remembering last night’s debauch He 
knew in his bones that he was no good and his poems were no good London 
Pleasures would never be finished If he lived to be a thousand he would never 
write a line worth reading Over and over, m self-hatred, he repeated those 
four stanzas of the poem he had been making up Christ, what tripe' Rhyme to 
rhyme-tinkle, tinkle, tinkle' Hollow as an empty biscuit tm That was the kind 
of muck he had wasted his life on 

He had walked a long way, five or seven miles perhaps His feet were hot and 
swollen from the pavements He was somewhere in Lambeth, in a slummy 
quarter where the narrow, puddled street plunged into blackness at fifty yards’ 
distance The few lamps, mist-rmged, hung like isolated stars, illumining 
nothing save themselves He was getting devilishly hungry The coffee-shops 
tempted him with their steamy windows and their chalked signs ‘Good Cup of 
Tea, 2d No Urns Used ’ But it was no use, he couldn’t spend his Joey He 
went under some echoing railway arches and up the alley on to Hungerford 
Bridge On the miry water, lit by the glare of skysigns, the muck of East 
London was racing inland Corks, lemons, barrel-staves, a dead dog, hunks of 
bread Gordon walked along the Embankment to Westminster The wind 
made the plane trees rattle Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over He winced 
That tripe again' Even now, though it was December, a few poor draggled old 
wrecks were settling down on the benches, tucking themselves up m sort of 
parcels of newspaper Gordon looked at them callously On the bum, they 
called it He would come to it himself some day Better so, perhaps? He never 
felt any pity for the genuine poor It is the black-coated poor, the middle- 
middle class, who need pitying 

He walked up to Trafalgar Square Hours and hours to kill The National 
Gallery? Ah, shut long ago, of course It would be It was a quarter past seven 
Three, four, five hours before he could sleep He walked seven times round the 
square, slowly Four times clockwise, three times widdershms His feet were 
sore and most of the benches were empty, but he would not sit down If he 
halted for an instant the longing for tobacco would come upon him In the 
Charing Cross Road the teashops called like sirens Once the glass door of a 
Lyons swung open, letting out a wave of hot cake-scented air It almost 
overcame him After all, why not go m? You could sit there for nearly an hour 
A cup of tea twopence, two buns a penny each He had fourpence halfpenny, 
counting the Joey But no' That bloody Joey' The girl at the cash desk would 
titter In a vivid vision he saw the girl at the cash desk, as she handled his 
threepenny-bit, grin sidelong at the girl behind the cake-counter They’d know 
it was your last threepence No use. Shove on Keep moving 

In the deadly glare of the Neon lights the pavements were densely crowded 
Gordon threaded his way, a small shabby figure, with pale face and unkempt 
hair. The trowd slid past him; he avoided and was avoided There is 
something horrible about London at night, the coldness, the anonymity, the 
aloofness. Seven million people, sliding to and fro, avoiding contact, barely 
aware of one another’s existence, like fish m an aquanum tank The street 
swarmed with pretty girls By scores they streamed past him, their faces 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 621 

averted or unseeing, cold nymph-creatures, dreading the eyes of the male It 
was queer how many of them seemed to be alone, or with another girl Far 
more women alone than women with men, he noted That too was money 
How many girls alive wouldn’t be manless sooner than take a man who’s 
moneyless? 

The pubs were open, oozing sour whiffs of beer People were trickling by 
ones and twos into the picture-houses Gordon halted outside a great garish 
picture-house, under the weary eye of the commissionaire, to examine the 
photographs Greta Garbo m The Painted Veil He yearned to go inside, not 
for Greta’s sake, but just for the warmth and the softness of the velvet seat He 
hated the pictures, of course, seldom went there even when he could afford it 
Why encourage the art that is destined to replace literature? But still, there is a 
kind of soggy attraction about it To sit on the padded seat in the warm smoke- 
scented darkness, letting the flickering drivel on the screen gradually 
overwhelm you-feeling the waves of its silliness lap you round till you seem to 
drown, intoxicated, in a viscous sea-after all, it’s the kind of drug we need 
The right drug for friendless people As he approached the Palace Theatre a 
tart on sentry-go under the porch marked him down, stepped forward, and 
stood m his path A short, stocky Italian girl, very young, with big black eyes 
She looked agreeable, and, what tarts so seldom are, merry For a moment he 
checked his step, even allowing himself to catch her eye She looked up at him, 
ready to break out into a broad-lipped smile Why not stop and talk to her? She 
looked as though she might understand him But no 1 No money' He looked 
away and side-stepped her with the cold haste of a man whom poverty makes 
virtuous How furious she’d be if he stopped and then she found he had no 
money' He pressed on Even to talk costs money 

Up Tottenham Court Road and Camden Road it was a dreary drudge He 
walked slower, dragging his feet a little He had done ten miles over 
pavements More girls streamed past, unseeing. Girls alone, girls with youths, 
girls with other girls, girls alone Their cruel youthful eyes went over him and 
through him as though he had not existed He was too tired to resent it His 
shoulders surrendered to their weariness, he slouched, not trying any longer to 
preserve his upright carriage and his you-be-damned air They flee from me 
that someone did me seek How could you blame them? He was thirty, moth- 
eaten, and without charm Why should any girl ever look at him again? 

He reflected that he must go home at once if he wanted any food-for Ma 
Wisbeach refused to serve meals after mne o’clock But the thought of his cold 
womanless bedroom sickened him To climb the stairs, light the gas, flop down 
at the table with hours to kill and nothing to do, nothing to read, nothing to 
smoke-no, not endurable In Camden Town the pubs were full and noisy, 
though this was only Thursday, Three women, red-armed, squat as the beer 
mugs in their hands, stood outside a pub door, talking From within came 
hoarse voices, fag-smoke, the fume of beer Gordon thought of the Crichton 
Arms Flaxman might be there. Why not risk it? A half of bitter, threepence 
halfpenny. He had fourpence halfpenny counting the Joey After all, a Joey u 
legal tender 



622 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

He felt dreadfully thirsty already It had been a mistake to let himself think 
of beer As he approached the Crichton, he heard voices singing The great 
garish pub seemed to be more brightly lighted than usual There was a concert 
of something going on inside Twenty ripe male voices were chanting in 
unison 


‘Fo-or ree’s a jorrigoo’ fellow, 

For ree’s a jorrigoo’ fellow. 

For ree’s a jorrigoo’ fe-ELL-OW- 
And toon oon us 1 ’ 

At least, that was what it sounded like Gordon drew nearer, pierced by a 
ravishing thirst The voices were so soggy, so infinitely beery When you heard 
them you saw the scarlet faces of prosperous plumbers There was a private 
room behind the bar where the Buffaloes held their secret conclaves 
Doubtless it was they who were singing They were giving some kind of 
commemorative booze to their president, secretary, Grand Herbivore, or 
whatever he is called Gordon hesitated outside the Saloon bar Better to go to 
the public bar, perhaps Draught beer m the public, bottled beer m the saloon 
He went round to the other side of the pub The beer-choked voices followed 
him 


‘With a toon oon ay 
An’ a toon oon ay’ 

*Fo-or ree’s a jorrigoo’ fellow. 

For ree’s a jorrigoo’ fellow-’ 

He felt quite faint for a moment But it was fatigue and hunger as well as 
thirst He could picture the cosy room where those Buffaloes were singing, the 
roaring fire, the big shmy table, the bovine photographs on the wall Could 
picture also, as the singing ceased, twenty scarlet faces disappearing into pots 
of beer He put his hand into his pocket and made sure that the threepenny-bit 
was still there After all, why not 5 In the public bar, who would comment 5 Slap 
the Joey down on the bar and pass it off as a joke, ‘Been saving that up from the 
Christmas pudding-ha, ha!’ Laughter all round Already he seemed to have 
the metallic taste of draught beer on his tongue 

He fingered the tiny disc, irresolute The Buffaloes had tuned up again 

‘With a toon oon ay, 

An’ a toon oon ay! 

‘Fo-or ree’s a jomgoo’ fellow- 

Gordon moved back to the saloon bar The window was frosted, and also 
steamy from the heat in side. Still, there were chinks where you could see 
through^ He peeped in. Yes, Flaxman was there 

, saloon bar was crowded Like all rooms seen from the outside, it looked 
MSakif cosy. The fire that blazed m the grate danced, mirrored, m the brass 
spittoons. Gordon thought he could almost smell the beer through the glass 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 62 3 

Flaxman was propping up the bar with two fish-faced pals who looked like 
insurance-touts of the better type One elbow on the bar, his foot on the rail, a 
beer-streaked glass in the other hand, he was swapping backchat with the 
blonde cutie barmaid She was standing on a chair behind the bar, ranging the 
bottled beer and talking saucily over her shoulder You couldn’t hear what 
they were saying, but you could guess Flaxman let fall some memorable 
witticism The fish-faced men bellowed with obscene laughter And the 
blonde cutie, tittering down at him, half shocked and half delighted, wriggled 
her neat little bum 

Gordon’s heart sickened To be in there, just to be m there 1 In the warmth 
and light, with people to talk to, with beer and cigarettes and a girl to flirt with' 
After all, why not go in’ You could borrow a bob off Flaxman Flaxman would 
lend it to you all right He pictured Flaxman’s careless assent-‘What ho, 
chappie 1 How’s life’ What’ A bob’ Sure 1 Take two Catch, chappie' ’-and the 
florin flicked along the beer-wet bar. Flaxman was a decent sort, m his way 
Gordon put his hand against the swing door He even pushed it open a few 
inches The warm fog of smoke and beer slipped through the crack A familiar, 
reviving smell, nervertheless as he smelled it his nerve failed him No' 
Impossible to go m He turned away He couldn’t go shoving m that saloon bar 
with only fourpence halfpenny in his pocket Never let other people buy your 
drinks for you' The first commandment of the moneyless He made off, down 
the dark pavement 

‘For ree’s a jorrigoo’ fe-ELL-OW- 

And toon oori us 1 

‘With, a toon oori ay! 

An’ a- 


The voices, diminishing with distance, rolled after him, bearing faint tidings 
of beer Gordon took the threepenny-bit from his pocket and sent it skimming 
away into the darkness 

He was going home, if you could call it ‘going’ At any rate he was 
gravitating m that direction He did not want to go home, but he had got to sit 
down. His legs ached and his feet were bruised, and that vile bedroom was the 
sole place in London where he had purchased the right to sit down. He slipped 
in quietly, but, as usual, not quite so quietly that Mrs Wisbeach failed to hear 
him She gave him a brief nosy glance round the corner of her door It would 
be a little after nine She might get him a meal if he asked her But she would 
grizzle and make a favour of it, and he would go to bed hungry sooner than face 
that 

He started up the stairs He was half way up the first flight when a double 
knock behind made him jump. The post' Perhaps a letter from Rosemary' 

Forced from outside, the letter flap lifted, and with an effort, like a heron 
regurgitating a flatfish, vomited a bunch of letters on to the mat Gordon’s 
heart bounded There were six or seven of them Surely among all that lot 
there must be one for himself! Mrs Wisbeach, as usual, had darted from her 
lair at the sound of the postman’s knock As a matter of fact, in two years 



6 24 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

Gordon had never once succeeded in getting hold of a letter before Mrs 
Wisbeach laid hands on it She gathered the letters jealously to her breast, and 
then, holding them up one at a time, scanned their addresses From her 
manner you could gather that she suspected each one of them of containing a 
wnt, an improper love letter, or an ad for Amen Pills 

‘One for you, Mr Comstock,’ she said sourly, handing him a letter 

His heart shrank and paused in its beat A long-shaped envelope Not from 
Rosemary, therefore Ah' It was addressed in his own handwriting From the 
editor of a paper, then He had two poems ‘out’ at present One with the 
Californian Review , the other with the Primrose Quarterly But this wasn’t an 
American stamp And the Primrose had had his poem at least six weeks' Good 
God, supposing they’d accepted it' 

He had forgotten Rosemary’s existence He said ‘Thanks'’, stuck the letter 
in his pocket, and started up the stairs with outward calm, but no sooner was he 
out of Mrs Wisbeach’s sight that he bounded up three steps at a time He had 
got to be alone to open that letter Even before he reached the door he was 
feeling for his matchbox, but his fingers were trembling so that m lighting the 
gas he chipped the mantle He sat down, took the letter from his pocket, and 
then quailed For a moment he could not nerve himself to open it He held it up 
to the light and felt it to see how thick it was His poem had been two sheets 
Then, calling himself a fool, he ripped the envelope open Out tumbled his 
own poem, and with it a neat-oh, so neat' -little printed slip of imitation 
parchment 

The Editor regrets that he is unable to make use of the enclosed contribution 

The slip was decorated with a design of funereal laurel leaves 

Gordon gazed at the thing with wordless hatred Perhaps no snub m the 
world is so deadly as this, because none is so unanswerable Suddenly he 
loathed his own poem and was acutely ashamed of it He felt it the weakest, 
silliest poem ever written Without looking at it again he tore it into small bits 
and flung them into the wastepaper basket He would put that poem out of his 
mind for ever The rejection slip, however, he did not tear up yet. He fingered 
it, feeling its loathly sleekness Such an elegant little thing, printed m 
admirable type You could tell at a glance that it came from a ‘good’ 
magazme-a snooty highbrow magazine with the money of a publishing house 
behind it Money, money' Money and culture! It was a stupid thing that he 
had done Fancy sending a poem to a paper like the Pnmrosel As though they’d 
accept poems from people like kirn The mere fact that the poem wasn’t typed 
would tell them what kind of person he was He might as well have dropped a 
card on Buckingham Palace. He thought of the people who wrote for the 
Prmrrne j a coterie of moneyed highbrows-those sleek, refined young animals 
who sucklpmoney and culture with their mother’s milk. The idea of trying to 
horn in among that pansy crowd' But he cursed them all the same. The sods! 
The Moody sods! ‘Hie Editor regrets!’ Why be so bloody mealy-mouthed 
about it? Why not say outright, ‘We don’t want your bloody poems We only 
take poems Irom chaps we were at Cambridge with You proletarians keep 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 62$ 

your distance 5 ? The bloody, hypocritical sods' 

At last he crumpled up the rejection slip, threw it away, and stood up Better 
get to bed while he had the energy to undress Bed was the only place that was 
warm But wait Wind the clock, set the alarm He went through the familiar 
action with a sense of deadly staleness His eye fell upon the aspidistra Two 
years he had inhabited this vile room, two mortal years in which nothing had 
been accomplished Seven hundred wasted days, all ending m the lonely bed 
Snubs, failures, insults, all of them unavenged Money, money, all is money' 
Because he had no money the Dorings 5 snubbed him, because he had no 
money the Primrose had turned down his poem, because he had no money 
Rosemary wouldn’t sleep with him Social failure, artistic failure, sexual 
failure-they are all the same And lack of money is at the bottom of them all 
He must hit back at somebody or something He could not go to bed with 
that rejection slip as the last thing in his mind He thought of Rosemary It was 
five days now since she had written If there had been a letter from her this 
evening even that rap over the knuckles from the Primrose Quarterly would 
have mattered less She declared that she loved him, and she wouldn’t sleep 
with him, wouldn’t even write to him' She was the same as all the others She 
despised him and forgot about him because he had no money and therefore 
didn’t matter He would write her an enormous letter, telling her what it felt 
like to be ignored and insulted, making her see how cruelly she had treated 
him 

He found a clean sheet of paper and wrote in the top right-hand corner 
‘31 Willowbed Road, nw, i December, 9 30 p m ’ 

But having written that much, he found that he could write no more He was 
in the defeated mood when even the writing of a letter is too great an effort 
Besides, what was the use? She would never understand No woman ever 
understands But he must write something Something to wound her-that was 
what he most wanted, at this moment He meditated for a long time, and at last 
wrote, exactly in the middle of the sheet 

You have broken my heart 

No address, no signature Rather neat it looked, all by itself, there m the 
middle of the sheet, in his small ‘scholarly’ handwriting Almost like a little 
poem in itself This thought cheered him up a little 
He stuck the letter in an envelope and went out and posted it at the post 
office on the corner, spending his last three halfpence on a penny stamp and a 
halfpenny stamp out of the slot machine. 



5 


‘We’re printing that poem of yours in next month’s Antichrist ,’ said Ravelston 
from his first-floor window 

Gordon, on the pavement below, affected to have forgotten the poem 
Ravelston was speaking about, he remembered it intimately, of course, as he 
remembered all his poems 

‘Which poem?’ he said 

‘The one about the dying prostitute We thought it was rather successful ’ 

Gordon laughed a laugh of gratified conceit, and managed to pass it off as a 
laugh of sardonic amusement 

‘Aha 1 A dying prostitute* That’s rather what you might call one of my 
subjects I’ll do you one about an aspidistra next time ’ 

Ravelston’s over-sensitive, boyish face, framed by nice dark-brown hair, 
drew back a little from the window 

‘It’s intolerably cold,’ he said You’d better come up and have some food, or 
something ’ 

‘No, you come down I’ve had dinner Let’s go to a pub and have some beer ’ 

‘All right then Half a minute while I get my shoes on,’ 

They had been talking for some minutes, Gordon on the pavement, 
Ravelston leaning out of the window above Gordon had announced his arrival 
not by knocking at the door but by throwing a pebble against the window pane 
He never, if he could help it, set foot inside Ravelston’s flat There was 
something in the atmosphere of the flat that upset him and made him feel 
mean, dirty, and out of place It was so overwhelmingly, though 
unconsciously, upper-class Only in the street or m a pub could he feel himself 
approximately Ravelston’s equal It would have astomshed Ravelston to learn 
that his four-roomed flat, which he thought of as a poky little place, had this 
effect upon Gordon To Ravelston, living in the wilds of Regent’s Park was 
practically the same thing as living m the slums, he had chosen to live there, en 
bon soaohste 3 precisely as your social snob will live m a mews in Mayfair for the 
sake of the ‘wT on his notepaper It was part of a lifelong attempt to escape 
from his own class and become, as it were, an honorary member of the 
proletariat. Like all such attempts, it was foredoomed to failure No rich man 
ever succeeds in disguising himself as a poor man, for money, like murder, will 
out. 

On the street door there was a brass plate inscribed* 

P W H RAVELSTON 
ANTICHRIST 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 627 

Ravelston lived on the first floor, and the editorial offices of Antichrist were 
downstairs Antichrist was a middle- to high-brow monthly. Socialist in a 
vehement but ill-defined way In general, it gave the impression of being 
edited by an ardent Nonconformist who had transferred his allegiance from 
God to Marx, and m doing so had got mixed up with a gang of vers libre poets 
This was not really Ravelston’s character, merely he was softer-hearted than 
an editor ought to be, and consequently was at the mercy of his contributors 
Practically anything got printed in Antichrist if Ravelston suspected that its 
author was starving 

Ravelston appeared a moment later, hatless and pulling on a pair of gauntlet 
gloves You could tell him at a glance for a rich young man He wore the 
umform of the moneyed intelligentsia, an old tweed coat-but it was one of 
those coats which have been made by a good tailor and grow more aristocratic 
as they grow older-very loose grey flannel bags, a grey pullover, much-worn 
brown shoes He made a point of going everywhere, even to fashionable houses 
and expensive restaurants, m these clothes, just to show his contempt for 
upper-class conventions, he did not fully realize that it is only the upper classes 
who can do these things Though he was a year older than Gordon he looked 
much younger He was very tall, with a lean, wide-shouldered body and the 
typical lounging grace of the upper-class youth But there was something 
curiously apologetic m his movements and m the expression of his face He 
seemed always in the act of stepping out of somebody else’s way When 
expressing an opinion he would rub his nose with the back of his left 
forefinger The truth was that m every moment of his life he was apologizing, 
tacitly, for the largeness of his income You could make him uncomfortable as 
easily by reminding him that he was rich as you could make Gordon by 
reminding him that he was poor 

‘You’ve had dinner, I gather?’ said Ravelston, m his rather Bloomsbury 
voice 

‘Yes, ages ago Haven’t you?’ 

‘Oh, yes, certainly Oh, quite'’ 

It was twenty past eight and Gordon had had no food since midday, Neither 
had Ravelston Gordon did not know that Ravelston was hungry, but 
Ravelston knew that Gordon was hungry, and Gordon knew that Ravelston 
knew it Nevertheless, each saw good reason for pretending not to be hungry 
They seldom or never had meals together Gordon would not let Ravelston 
buy his meals for him, and for himself he could not afford to go to restaurants, 
not even to a Lyons or an A B C This was Monday and he had five and 
mnepence left He might afford a couple of pints at a pub, but not a proper 
meal. When he and Ravelston met it was always agreed, with silent 
manoeuvnngs, that they should do nothing that involved spending money, 
beyond the shilhng or so one spends in a pub. In this way the fiction was kept 
up that there was no serious difference m their incomes 

Gordon sidled closer to Ravelston as they started down the pavement He 
would have taken his arm, only of course one can’t do that kind of thing. Beside 
Ravelston’s taller, comeher figure he looked frail, fretful, and miserably 



6 28 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

shabby He adored Ravelston and was never quite at ease in his presence 
Ravelston had not merely a charm of manner, but also a kind of fundamental 
decency, a graceful attitude to life, which Gordon scarcely encountered 
elsewhere Undoubtedly it was bound up with the fact that Ravelston was rich 
For money buys all virtues Money suffereth long and is kind, is not puffed up, 
doth not behave unseemly, seeketh not her own But m some ways Ravelston 
was not even like a moneyed person The fatty degeneration of the spirit which 
goes with wealth had missed him, or he had escaped it by a conscious effort 
Indeed his whole life was a struggle to escape it It was for this reason that he 
gave up his time and a large part of his income to editing an unpopular Socialist 
monthly And apart from Antichrist , money flowed from him in all directions 
A tribe of cadgers ranging from poets to pavement-artists browsed upon him 
unceasingly For himself he lived upon eight hundred a year or thereabouts 
Even of this income he was acutely ashamed It was not, he realized, exactly a 
proletarian income, but he had never learned to get along on less Eight 
hundred a year was a minimum living wage to him, as two pounds a week was 
to Gordon 

‘How is your work getting on’’ said Ravelston presently 
‘Oh, as usual It’s a drowsy kind of job Swapping back-chat with old hens 
about Hugh Walpole I don’t object to it ’ 

‘I meant your own work-your writing Is London Pleasures getting on all 
right’’ 

‘Oh, Christ 1 Don’t speak of it It’s turning my hair grey.’ 

‘Isn’t it going forward at all’’ 

‘My books don’t go forward They go backward ’ 

Ravelston sighed As editor of Antichrist , he was used to encouraging 
despondent poets that it had become a second nature to him He did not need 
telling why Gordon ‘couldn’t ’ write, and why all poets nowadays ‘can’t’ write, 
and why when they do write it is something as and as the rattling of a pea inside 
a big drum He said with sympathetic gloom 
‘Of course I admit this isn’t a hopeful age to write poetry in ’ 

‘You bet it isn’t ’ 

Gordon kicked his heel against the pavement. He wished that London 
Pleasures had not been mentioned It brought back to him the memory of his 
mean, cold bedroom and the grimy papers littered under the aspidistra He 
said abruptly: 

‘This writing business 1 What b — s it all is 1 Sitting m a corner torturing a 
nerve which won’t even respond any longer And who wants poetry nowadays? 
Training performing fleas would be more useful by comparison ’ 

‘Still, you oughtn’t to let yourself be discouraged After all, you do produce 
something, which is more than one can say for a lot of poets nowadays. There 
was Mice, for instance.’ 

‘Oh, Micel It makes me spew to think of it.’ 

He thought with loathing of that sneaky little foolscap octavo. Those forty or 
fifty drab, dead little poems, each like a little abortion in its labelled jar. 
‘Exceptional promise’. The Times Lit Supp had said. A hundred and fifty- 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 629 

three copies sold and the rest remaindered He had one of those movements of 
contempt and even horror which every artist has at times when he thinks of his 
own work 

‘It’s dead,’ he said ‘Dead as a blasted foetus m a bottle ’ 

‘Oh, well, I suppose that happens to most books You can’t expect an 
enormous sale for poetry nowadays There’s too much competition ’ 

‘I didn’t mean that I meant the poems themselves are dead There’s no life 
in them Everything I write is like that Lifeless, gutless Not necessarily ugly 
or vulgar, but dead-just dead ’ The word ‘dead’ re-echoed m his mmd, setting 
up its own train of thought He added ‘My poems are dead because I’m dead 
You’re dead We’re all dead Dead people in a dead world ’ 

Ravelston murmured agreement, with a curious air of guilt And now they 
were off upon their favourite subject- Gordon’s favourite subject, anyway, the 
futility, the bloodiness, the deathliness of modern life They never met without 
talking for at least half an hour in this vein But it always made Ravelston feel 
rather uncomfortable In a way, of course, he knew- it was precisely this that 
Antichrist existed to point out-that life under a decaying capitalism is deathly 
and meaningless But this knowledge was only theoretical You can’t really feel 
that kind of thing when your income is eight hundred a year Most of the time, 
when he wasn’t thinking of coal-miners, Chinese junk-coolies, and the 
unemployed in Middlesbrough, he felt that life was pretty good fun 
Moreover, he had the naive belief that m a little while Socialism is going to put 
things right Gordon always seemed to him to exaggerate So there was subtle 
disagreement between them, which Ravelston was too good-mannered to 
press home 

But with Gordon it was different Gordon’s income was two pounds a week 
Therefore the hatred of modern life, the desire to see our money-civilization 
blown to hell by bombs, was a thing he genuinely felt They were walking 
southward, down a darkish, meanly decent residential street with a few 
shuttered shops From a hoarding on the blank end of a house the yard-wide 
face of Corner Table simpered, pallid m the lamplight Gordon caught a 
glimpse of a withering aspidistra in a lower window London 1 Mile after mile 
of mean lonely houses, let off in flats and single rooms, not homes, not 
communities, just clusters of meaningless lives drifting m a sort of drowsy 
chaos to the grave 1 He saw men as corpses walking The thought that he was 
merely objectifying his own inner misery hardly troubled him His mmd went 
back to Wednesday afternoon, when he had desired to hear the enemy 
aeroplanes zooming over London. He caught Ravelston’s arm and paused to 
gesticulate at the Corner Table poster 
‘Look at that bloody thing up there r Look at it, just look at it* Doesn’t it 
make you spew?’ 

‘It’s aesthetically offensive, I grant But I don’t see that it matters very 
greatly ’ 

'Of course it matters-havmg the town plastered with things like that/ 

'Oh, well, it’s merely a temporary phenomenon Capitalism in Its last phase. 
I doubt whether it’s worth worrying about/ 



6 jo Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

‘But there’s more m it than that Just look at that fellow’s face gapmg down 
at us f You can see our whole civilization written there The imbecility, the 
emptiness, the desolation 1 You can’t look at it without thinking of French 
letters and machine guns Do you know that the other day I was actually 
wishing war would break out’ I was longing for lt-praying for it, almost ’ 

‘Of course, the trouble is, you see, that about half the young men in Europe 
are wishing the same thing ’ 

‘Let’s hope they are Then perhaps it’ll happen ’ 

‘My dear old chap, no* Once is enough, surely ’ 

Gordon walked on, fretfully ‘This life wehve nowadays 1 It’s not life, it’s 
stagnation, death-m-life Look at all these bloody houses, and the meaningless 
people inside them 1 Sometimes I think we’re all corpses Just rotting upright ’ 
‘But where you make your mistake, don’t you see, is in talking as if all this 
was incurable This is only something that’s got to happen before the 
proletariat take over ’ 

‘Oh, Socialism 1 Don’t talk to me about Socialism ’ 

‘You ought to read Marx, Gordon, you really ought Then you’d realize that 
this is only a phase It can’t go on for ever ’ 

‘Can’t it’ It feels as if it was going on for ever ’ 

‘It’s merely that we’re at a bad moment We’ve got to die before we can be 
reborn, if you take my meaning ’ 

‘We’re dying right enough I don’t see much signs of our being reborn ’ 
Ravelston rubbed his nose ‘Oh, well, we must have faith, I suppose And 
hope ’ 

‘We must have money you mean,’ said Gordon gloomily 
‘Money’’ 

‘It’s the price of optimism Give me five quid a week and Fd be a Socialist, I 
dare say ’ 

Ravelston looked away, discomforted This money-business 1 Everywhere it 
came up against you 1 Gordon wished he had not said it Money is the one thing 
you must never mention when you are with people richer than yourself Or if 
you do, then it must be money in the abstract, money with a big ‘M’, not the 
actual concrete money that’s m your pocket and isn’t m mine But the accursed 
subject drew him like a magnet Sooner or later, especially when he had a few 
drinks inside him, he invariably began talking with self-pitiful detail about the 
bloodiness of life on two quid a week Sometimes, from sheer nervous impulse 
to say the wrong thing, he would come out with some squalid confession-as, 
for instance, that he had been without tobacco for two days, or that his 
underclothes were in holes and his overcoat up the spout. But nothing of that 
scat should happen tonight, he resolved. They veered swiftly away from the 
subject of money and began talking in a more general way about Socialism 
Ravelston had been trying for years to convert Gordon to Socialism, without 
even succeeding in interesting him in it Presently they passed a low-looking 
pub on a comer in a side-street A sour cloud of beer seemed to hang about it 
5fbe Smell revolted Ravelston. He would have quickened his pace to get away 
feom it. But Gordon paused, his nostrils tickled 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 6 31 

‘Christ 1 1 could do with a drink/ he said 
‘So could 1/ said Ravelston gallantly 

Gordon shoved open the door of the public bar, Ravelston following 
Ravelston persuaded himself that he was fond of pubs, especially low-class 
pubs Pubs are genumely proletarian In a pub you can meet the working class 
on equal terms-or that’s the theory, anyway But m practice Ravelston never 
went into a pub unless he was with somebody like Gordon, and he always felt 
like a fish out of water when he got there A foul yet coldish air enveloped 
them It was a filthy, smoky room, low-ceilinged, with a sawdusted floor and 
plain deal tables ringed by generations of beer-pots In one corner four 
monstrous women with breasts the size of melons were sitting drinking porter 
and talking with bitter intensity about someone called Mrs Croop The 
landlady, a tall grim woman with a black fringe, looking like the madame of a 
brothel, stood behind the bar, her powerful forearms folded, watching a game 
of darts which was going on between four labourers and a postman You had to 
duck under the darts as you crossed the room there was a moment’s hush and 
people glanced inquisitively at Ravelston He was so obviously a gentleman 
They didn’t see his type very often m the public bar 
Ravelston pretended not to notice that they were staring at him He lounged 
towards the bar, pulling off a glove to feel for the money in his pocket ‘What’s 
yours?’ he said casually 

But Gordon had already shoved his way ahead and was tapping a shilling on 
the bar Always pay for the first round of drinks' It was his point of honour 
Ravelston made for the only vacant table, A navvy leaning on the bar turned on 
his elbow and gave him a long, insolent stare ‘A — toff’ he was thinking 
Gordon came back balancing two pint glasses of the dark common ale They 
were thick cheap glasses, thick as jam jars almost, and dim and greasy A thm 
yellow froth was subsiding on the beer The air was thick with gunpowdery 
tobacco-smoke Ravelston caught sight of a well-filled spittoon near the bar 
and averted his eyes It crossed his mind that this beer had been sucked up 
from some beetle-ridden cellar through yards of slimy tube, and that the 
glasses had never been washed in their lives, only rinsed m beery water 
Gordon was very hungry He could have done with some bread and cheese, but 
to order any would have been to betray the fact that he had had no dinner He 
took a deep pull at his beer and lighted a cigarette, which made him forget his 
hunger a little, Ravelston also swallowed a mouthful or so and set his glass 
gingerly down It was typical London beer, sickly and yet leaving a chemical 
after-taste Ravelston thought of the wmes of Burgundy. They went on 
arguing about Socialism 

‘You know, Gordon, it’s really time you started reading Marx/ said 
Ravelston, less apologetically than usual, because the vile taste of the beer had 
annoyed him 

‘I’d sooner read Mrs Humphry Ward/ said Gordon 
‘But don’t you see, your attitude is so unreasonable. You’re always tirading 
against Capitalism, and yet you won’t accept the only possible alternative One 
can’t put thmgs right m a hole-and-corner Way One’s got to accept- either 



632 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

Capitalism or Socialism There’s no way out of it ’ 

‘I tell you I can’t be bothered with Socialism The very thought of it makes 
me yawn ’ 

‘But what’s your objection to Socialism, anyway?’ 

‘There’s only one objection to Socialism, and that is that nobody wants it ’ 
‘Oh, surely it’s rather absurd to say that 1 ’ 

‘That’s to say, nobody who could see what Socialism would really mean ’ 
‘But what would Socialism mean, according to your idea of it?’ 

‘Oh 1 Some kind of Aldous Huxley Brave New World only not so amusing 
Four hours a day in a model factory, tightening up bolt number 6003 Rations 
served out m grease-proof paper at the communal kitchen Community-hikes 
from Marx Hostel to Lenin Hostel and back Free abortion-clinics on all the 
corners All very well m its way, of course Only we don’t want it ’ 

Ravelston sighed Once a month, m Antichrist , he repudiated this version of 
Socialism ‘Well, what do we want, then?’ 

‘God knows All we know is what we don’t want That’s what’s wrong with 
us nowadays We’re stuck, like Buridan’s donkey Only there are three 
alternatives instead of two, and all three of them make us spew Socialism’s 
only one of them ’ 

‘And what are the other two?’ 

‘Oh, I suppose suicide and the Catholic Church ’ 

Ravelston smiled, anticlencally shocked ‘The Catholic Church' Do you 
consider that an alternative?’ 

‘Well, it’s a standing temptation to the intelligentsia, isn’t it?’ 

‘Not what I should call the intelligentsia Though there was Eliot, of 
course,’ Ravelston admitted 

‘And there’ll be plenty more, you bet I dare say it’s fairly cosy under 
Mother Church’s wing A bit insanitary, of course-but you’d feel safe there, 
anyway ’ 

Ravelston rubbed his nose reflectively ‘It seems to me that’s only another 
form of suicide ’ , , 

‘In a way But so’s Socialism At least it’s a counsel of despair. But I couldn’t 
commit suicide, real suicide It’s too meek and mild I’m not going to give up 
my share of earth to anyone else- I’d want to do m a few of my enemies first ’ 
Ravelston smiled again ‘And who are your enemies?’ 

*Oh, anyone with over five hundred a year ’ 

A momentary uncomfortable silence fell Ravelston’s income, after payment 
of income tax, was probably two thousand a year This was the kind of thing 
Gordon was always saying To cover the awkwardness of the moment, 
Ravelston took up his glass, steeled himself against the nauseous taste, and 
swallowed about two-thirds of his beer-enough at any rate, to give the 
mqpressiom that he had finished it 

Thduk upl’ he said with would-be heartiness ‘It’s time we had the other half 

oCdNL* 

^Gordon emptied his glass and let Ravelston take it He di&not mind letting 
■^I^S^teatpay for the drinks now. He had paid the first round and honour was 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 633 

satisfied Ravelston walked self-consciously to the bar People began staring at 
him again as soon as he stood up The navvy, still leamng against the bar over 
his untouched pot of beer, gazed at him with quiet insolence Ravelston 
resolved that he would drink no more of this filthy common ale 
‘Two double whiskies, would you, please’’ he said apologetically 
The grim landlady stared ‘What’’ she said 
‘Two double whiskies, please 5 

‘No whisky ’ere We don’t sell spirits Beer ’ouse, we are * 

The navvy smiled flickering under his moustache ‘ — ignorant toff 1 ’ he was 
thinking ‘Asking for a whisky in a — beer ’ouse 1 ’ Ravelston’s pale face flushed 
slightly He had not known till this moment that some of the poorer pubs 
cannot afford a spirit licence 

‘Bass, then, would you’ Two pint bottles of Bass ’ 

There were no pint bottles they had to have four half pints It was a very 
poor house Gordon took a deep, satisfying swallow of Bass More alcoholic 
than the draught beer, it fizzed and prickled in his throat, and because he was 
hungry it went a little to his head He felt at once more philosophic and more 
self-pitiful He had made up his mind not to begin belly-aching about his 
poverty, but now he was going to begin after all He said abruptly 
‘This is all b — s that we’ve been talking ’ 

‘What’s all b — s’’ 

‘All this about Socialism and Capitalism and the state of the modern world 
and God knows what I don’t give a — for the state of the modern world If the 
whole of England was starving except myself and the people I care about, I 
wouldn’t give a damn ’ 

‘Don’t you exaggerate just a little’’ 

‘No All this talk we make- we’re only objectifying our own feelings It’s all 
dictated by what we’ve got in our pockets I go up and down London saying 
it’s a city of the dead, and our civilization’s dying, and I wish war would break 
out, and God knows what, and all it means is that my wages are two quid a 
week and I wish they were five ’ 

Ravelston, once again reminded obliquely of his income, stroked his nose 
slowly with the knuckle of his left forefinger 
‘Of course. I’m with you up to a point. After all, it’s only what Marx said 
Every ideology is a reflection of economic circumstances ’ 

‘Ah, but you only understand it out of Marx 1 You don’t know what it means 
to have to crawl along on two quid a week. It isn’t a question of hardship-it’s 
nothing so decent as hardship It’s the bloody, sneaking, squalid meaness of it 
Living alone for weeks on end because when you’ve no money you’ve no 
friends. Calling yourself a writer and never even producing anything because 
you’re always too washed out to write It’s a sort of filthy sub-world one lives 
m. A sort of spiritual sewer.’ 

He had started now They were never together long without Gordon 
beginning to talk in tins strain. It was the vilest manners. It embarrassed 
Ravelston horribly. And yet somehow^ Gordon could not help it. He had got to 
retail his troubles to somebody, and Ravelston was the only perse®® who 



6 34 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

understood Poverty, like every other dirty wound, has got to be exposed 
occasionally He began to talk in obscene detail of his life in Willowbed Road 
He dilated on the smell of slops and cabbage, the clotted sauce-bottles m the 
dining-room, the vile food, the aspidistras He described his furtive cups of tea 
and his trick of throwing used tea-leaves down the w c Ravelston, guilty and 
miserable, sat staring at his glass and revolving it slowly between his hands 
Against his right breast he could feel, a square accusing shape, the pocket-book 
m which, as he knew, eight pound notes and two ten-bob notes nestled against 
his fat green cheque-book How awful these details of poverty are' Not that 
what Gordon was describing was real poverty It was at worst the fringe of 
poverty But what of the real poor? What of the unemployed m 
Middlesbrough, seven in a room on twenty-five bob a week? When there are 
people living like that, how dare one walk the world with pound notes and 
cheque-books in one’s pocket? 

‘It’s bloody,’ he murmured several times, impotently In his heart he 
wondered-it was his invariable reaction-whether Gordon would accept a 
tenner if you offered to lend it to him 

They had another drink, which Ravelston again paid for, and went out into 
the street It was almost time to part Gordon never spent more than an hour or 
two with Ravelston One’s contacts with rich people, like one’s visits to high 
altitudes, must always be brief It was a moonless, starless night, with a damp 
wind blowing The night air, the beer, and the watery radiance of the lamps 
induced m Gordon a sort of dismal clarity He perceived that it is quite 
impossible to explain to any rich person, even to anyone so decent as 
Ravelston, the essential bloodiness of poverty For this reason it became all the 
more important to explain it He said suddenly 
‘Have you read Chaucer’s Man of Lawe’s Tale ?’ 

‘The Man of Lawe’s Tale ? Not that I remember What’s it about?’ 

‘I forget I was thinking of the first six stanzas Where he talks about 
poverty The way it gives everyone the right to stamp on you 1 The way 
everyone wants to stamp on.you 1 It makes people hate you, to know that you’ve 
no money They insult you just for the pleasure of insulting you and knowing 
that you can’t hit back ’ 

Ravelston was pained ‘Oh, no, surely not' People aren’t so bad as all that ’ 
‘Ah, but you don’t know the things that happen 1 ’ 

Gordon did not want to be told that ‘people aren’t so bad’. He clung with a 
sort of painful joy to the notion that because he was poor everyone must want 
to insult him It fitted in with his philosophy of life And suddenly, with the 
feeling that he could not stop himself, he was talking of the thing that had been 
ranMingm his mind for two days past-the snub he had had from the Dormgs 
on Thursday. He poured the whole story out quite shamelessly Ravelston was 
amazed. He could not understand what Gordon was making such a fuss about 
To fee, disappointed at missing a beastly literary tea-party seemed to him 
absurd He would not have gone to a literary tea-party if you had paid him 
like all rich people, he spent far more time m avoiding human ^society than in 
seeking it He interrupted Gordon 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 6 3 5 

‘Really, you know, you ought not to take offence so easily After all, a thing 
like that doesn’t really matter ’ 

‘It isn’t the thing itself that matters, it’s the spirit behind it The way they 
snub you as a matter of course, just because you’ve got no money ’ 

‘But quite possibly it was all a mistake, or something Why should anyone 
want to snub you?’ 

‘ “If thou be poure, thy brother hateth thee,” ’ quoted Gordon perversely 

Ravelston, deferential even to the opinions of the dead, rubbed his nose 
‘Does Chaucer say that? Then I’m afraid I disagree with Chaucer People don’t 
hate you, exactly ’ 

‘They do And they’re quite right to hate you You are hateful It’s like those 
ads for Listerme “Why is he always alone? Halitosis is ruining his career ” 
Poverty is spiritual halitosis ’ 

Ravelston sighed Undoubtedly Gordon was perverse They walked on, 
arguing, Gordon vehemently, Ravelston deprecatmgly Ravelston was 
helpless against Gordon in an argument of this kind He felt that Gordon 
exaggerated, and yet he never liked to contradict him How could he? He was 
rich and Gordon was poor And how can you argue about poverty with 
someone who is genumely poor? 

‘And then the way women treat you when you’ve no money 1 ’ Gordon went 
on ‘That’s another thing about this accursed money business-women 1 ’ 

Ravelston nodded rather gloomily This sounded to him more reasonable 
than what Gordon had been saying before He thought of Hermione Slater, his 
own girl. They had been lovers two years but had never bothered to get 
married It was ‘too much fag’, Hermione always said She was rich, of course, 
or rather her people were He thought of her shoulders, wide, smooth, and 
young, that seemed to rise out of her clothes like a mermaid rising from the sea, 
and her skm and hair, which were somehow warm and sleepy, like a wheatfield 
m the sun Hermione always yawned at the mention of Socialism, and refused 
even to read Antichrist ‘Don’t talk to me about the lower classes,’ she used to 
say ‘I hate them They smell" And Ravelston adored her. 

‘Of course women are a difficulty,’ he admitted 

‘They’re more than a difficulty, they’re a bloody curse That is, if you’ve got 
no money A woman hates the sight of you if you’ve got no money.’ 

T think that’s putting it a little too strongly Things aren’t so crude as all 
that ’ 

Gordon did not listen ‘What rot it is to talk about Socialism or any other ism 
when women are what they are 1 The only thing a woman ever wants is money; 
money for a house of her own and two babies and Drage furniture and an 
aspidistra The only sin they can imagine is not wanting to grab money No 
woman ever judges a man by anything except his income. Of course she 
doesn’t put it to herself like that She^says he’s such a mce mow-meaning that 
he’s got plenty of money And if you haven’t got money you aren’t nice You’re 
dishonoured, somehow You’ve sinned Sinned against the aspidistra,’ 

‘You talk a gyeat deal about aspidistras,’ said Ravelston 

‘They’re a dashed important subject,’ said Gordon 



6 36 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

Ravelston rubbed his nose and looked away uncomfortably 

‘Look here, Gordon, you don’t mind my asking-have you got a girl of your 
own 5 ’ 

‘Oh, Christ 1 don’t speak of her’’ 

He began, nevertheless, to talk about Rosemary Ravelston had never met 
Rosemary At this moment Gordon could not even remember what Rosemary 
was like He could not remember how fond he was of her and she of him, how 
happy they always were together on the rare occasions when they could meet, 
how patiently she put up with his almost intolerable ways He remembered 
nothing save that she would not sleep with him and that it was now a week 
since she had even written In the dank night air, with beer inside him, he felt 
himself a forlorn, neglected creature Rosemary was ‘cruel’ to him-that was 
how he saw it Perversely, for the mere pleasure of tormenting himself and 
making Ravelston uncomfortable, be began to invent an imaginary character 
for Rosemary He built up a picture of her as a callous creature who was 
amused by him and yet half despised him, who played with him and kept him 
at aim’s length, and who would nevertheless fall into his arms if only he had a 
little more money And Ravelston, who had never met Rosemary, did not 
altogether disbelieve him He broke m 

‘But I say, Gordon, look here This girl, Miss-Miss Waterlow, did you say 
her name was?-Rosemary, doesn’t she care for you at all, really?’ 

Gordon’s conscience pricked him, though not very deeply He could not say 
that Rosemary did not care for him 

‘Oh, yes, she does care for me In her own way, I dare say she cares for me 
quite a lot But not enough, don’t you see She can’t, while I’ve got no money 
It’s all money ’ 

‘But surely money isn’t so important as all that? After all, there are other 
things ’ 

‘What other things? Don’t you see that a man’s whole personality is bound 
up with his income? His personality is has income How can you be attractive to 
a girl when you’ve got no money? You can’t wear decent clothes, you can’t take 
her out to dinner or to the theatre or away for week-ends, you can’t carry a 
cheery, interesting atmosphere about with you And it’s rot to say that kind of 
thing doesn’t matter It does. If you haven’t got money there isn’t even 
anywhere where you can meet. Rosemary and I never meet except m the 
streets or in picture galleries She lives in some foul women’s hostel, and my 
bitch of a landlady won’t allow women in the house Wandering up and down 
beastly wet streets-that’s what Rosemary associates me with Don’t you see 
how it takes die gilt off everything?’ 

Ravelston was distressed. It must be pretty bloody when you haven’t even 
themoney to take your girl out He tried to nerve himself to say something, and 
failed. With guilt, and also with desire, he thought of Hermione’s body, naked 
hfeeaifpewarm fruit. With any luck she would have dropped m at the flat this 
evening. Probably she was waiting for him now He thought of the 
unemployed in Middlesbrough Sexual starvation is awful among the 
nn^nptoyed. They were nearing the flat He glanced up at the windows. Yes, 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 6 37 

they were lighted up Hermione must be there She had her own latchkey 
As they approached the flat Gordon edged closer to Ravelston Now the 
evening was ending, and he must part from Ravelston, whom he adored, and 
go back to his foul lonely bedroom And all evenings ended m this way, the 
return through the dark streets to the lonely room, the womanless bed And 
Ravelston would say ‘Come up, won’t you?’ and Gordon, in duty bound, 
would say, ‘No ’ Never stay too long with those you love-another 
commandment of the moneyless 

They halted at the foot of the steps Ravelston laid his gloved hand on one of 
the iron spearheads of the railing 

‘Come up, won’t you?’ he said without conviction 
‘No, thanks It’s time I was getting back ’ 

Ravelston’s fingers tightened round the spearhead He pulled as though to 
go up, but did not go Uncomfortably, looking over Gordon’s head into the 
distance, he said 

‘I say, Gordon, look here You won’t be offended if I say something?’ 
‘What?’ 

‘I say, you know, I hate that business about you and your girl Not being 
able to take her out, and all that It’s bloody, that kind of thing ’ 

‘Oh, it’s nothing really ’ 

As soon as he heard Ravelston say that it was ‘bloody’, he knew that he had 
been exaggerating He wished that he had not talked m that silly self-pitiful 
way One says these things, with the feeling that one cannot help saying them, 
and afterwards one is sorry 

‘I dare say I exaggerate,’ he said 

‘I say, Gordon, look here Let me lend you ten quid Take the girl out to 
dinner a few times Or away for the week-end, or something It might make all 
the difference I hate to think-’ 

Gordon frowned bitterly, almost fiercely He had stepped a pace back, as 
though from a threat or an insult The terrible thing was that the temptation to 
say ‘Yes’ had almost ovef whelmed him There was so much that ten quid 
would do 1 He had a fleeting vision of Rosemary and himself at a restaurant 
table-a bowl of grapes and peaches, a bowing hovermg waiter, a wine bottle 
dark and dusty in its wicker cradle. 

‘No fear!’ he said 

‘I do wish you would I tell you I’d like to lend it you.’ 

‘Thanks But I prefer to keep my friends.’ 

‘Isn’t that rather- well, rather a bourgeois kind of thing to say?’ 

‘Do you think it would be borrowing if I took ten quid off you? I couldn’t pay 
it back m ten years ’ 

‘Oh, well’ It wouldn’t matter so very much ’ Ravelston looked away. Out it 
had got to come-the disgraceful, hateful admission that he found himself 
forced so curiously often to make' ‘You know, I’ve got quite a lot of money.* 
‘I know you have. That’s exactly why I won’t borrow off you.’ 

‘You know, Gordon, sometimes you’re just a little bit-well, pigheaded * 

‘I dare sky. help it ’* 



6 38 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

‘Oh, well' Good night, then ’ 

‘Good night ’ 

Ten minutes later Ravelston rode southwards in a taxi, with Hermione She 
had been waiting for him, asleep or half asleep in one of the monstrous 
armchairs m front of the sitting-room fire Whenever there was nothing 
particular to do, Hermione always fell asleep as promptly as an animal, and the 
more she slept the healthier she became As he came across to her she woke and 
stretched herself with voluptuous, sleepy writhmgs, half smiling, half yawning 
up at him, one cheek and bare arm rosy in the firelight Presently she mastered 
her yawns to greet him 

‘Hullo, Philip' Where have you been all this time? I’ve been waiting ages ’ 
‘Oh, I’ve been out with a fellow Gordon Comstock I don’t expect you 
know him The poet ’ 

‘Poet 1 How much did he borrow off you?’ 

‘Nothing He’s not that kind of person He’s rather a fool about money, as a 
matter of fact But he’s very gifted in his way ’ 

‘You and your poets' You look tired, Philip What time did you have 
dinner?’ 

‘Well-as a matter of fact I didn’t have any dinner ’ 

‘Didn’t have any dinner' Why?’ 

‘Oh, well, you see - 1 don’t know if you’ll understand It was a kind of 
accident It was like this ’ 

He explained Hermione burst out laughing and dragged herself into a more 
upright position 

‘Philip' You are a silly old ass' Going without your dinner, just so as not to 
hurt that little beast’s feelings' You must have some food at once And of 
course your char’s gone home Why don’t you keep some proper servants, 
Philip? I hate this hole-and-corner way you live We’ll go out and have supper 
at Modigliani’s ’ 

‘But it’s after ten They’ll be shut ’ 

‘Nonsense' They’re open till two I’ll ring up for a taxi I’m not going to 
have you starving yourself,’ 

In the taxi she lay against him, still half asleep, her head pillowed on his 
breast He thought of the unemployed m Middlesbrough, seven m a room on 
twenty-five bob a week. But the girl’s body was heavy against him, and 
Middlesbrough was very far away Also he was damnably hungry He thought 
of his favourite comer table at Modigliani’s, and of that vile pub with its hard 
benches, stale beer-stink, and brass spittoons Hermione was sleepily lecturing 
him 

‘ Philip, why do you have to live m such a dreadful way?’ 

‘But I don’t live In a dreadful way.’ 

-Y^.you do. Pretending you’re poor when you’re not, and living in that 
po servants, and going about with all these beastly people,’ 
*What beastly people?’ 

people hke tins poet friend of yours ‘All those people who write for 
yo pt jsaper. They only do it to cadge from you. Of course I know you’re a 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 6 39 

Socialist So am I I mean we’re all Socialists nowadays But I don’t see why 
you have to give all your money away and make friends with the lower classes 
You can be a Socialist and have a good time, that’s what I say ’ 

‘Hermione, dear, please don’t call them the lower classes*’ 

‘Why not’ They are the lower classes, aren’t they’’ 

‘It’s such a hateful expression Call them the working class, can’t you’’ 
‘The working class, if you like, then But they smell just the same ’ 

‘You oughtn’t to say that kind of thing,’ he protested weakly 
‘Do you know, Philip, sometimes I think you like the lower classes ’ 

‘Of course I like them ’ 

‘How disgusting How absolutely disgusting ’ 

She lay quiet, content to argue no longer, her arms round him, like a sleepy 
siren The woman-scent breathed out of her, a powerful wordless propaganda 
against all altruism and all justice Outside Modigliani’s they had paid off the 
taxi and were moving for the door when a big, lank wreck of a man seemed to 
spring up from the paving-stones in front of them He stood across their path 
like some fawning beast, with dreadful eagerness and yet timorously, as 
though afraid that Ravelston would strike him His face came close up to 
Ravelston’s-a dreadful face, fish-white and scrubby-bearded to the eyes The 
words ‘A cup of tea, guv’nor*’ were breathed through carious teeth Ravelston 
shrank from him m disgust He could not help it His hand moved 
automatically to his pocket But in the same instant Hermione caught him by 
the arm and hauled him inside the restaurant 

‘You’d give away every penny you’ve got if I let you,’ she said 
They went to their favourite table in the corner Hermione played with some 
grapes, But Ravelston was very hungry He ordered the grilled rumpsteak he 
had been thinking of, and half a bottle of Beaujolais The fat, white-haired 
Italian waiter, an old friend of Ravelston’ s, brought the smoking steak 
Ravelston cut it open Lovely, its red-blue heart* In Middlesbrough the 
unemployed huddle in frowzy beds, bread and marg and milkless tea in their 
bellies He settled down to his steak with all the shameful joy of a dog with a 
stolen leg of mutton 

Gordon walked rapidly homewards It was cold The fifth of 
December-real winter now Circumcise ye your foreskins, saith the Lord, 
The damp wind blew spitefully through the naked trees Sharply the menacing 
wind sweeps over The poem he had begun on Wednesday, of which six stanzas 
were now finished, came back to his mind He did not dislike it at this moment 
It was queer how talking with Ravelston always bucked him up The mere 
contact with Ravelston seemed to reassure him somehow Even when their talk 
had been unsatisfactory, he came away with the feeling that, after all, he wasn’t 
quite a failure Half aloud he repeated the six finished stanzas. They were not 
bad, not bad at all 

But intermittently he was going over in his mind the things he had said to 
Ravelston He stuck to everything he had said. The humiliation of poverty! 
That’s what they can’t understand and won’t understand Not hardship-'-you, 
don’t suffer hardship on two quid a week, and if you did it wouldn’t 



640 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

matter-but just humiliation, the awful, bloody humiliation The way it gives 
everyone the right to stamp on you The way everyone wants to stamp on you 
Ravelston wouldn’t believe it He had too much decency, that was why He 
thought you could be poor and still be treated like a human being But Gordon 
knew better He went into the house repeating to himself that he knew better 
There was a letter waiting for him on the hall tray His heart jumped All 
letters excited him nowadays He went up the stairs three at a time, shut 
himself m and lit the gas The letter was from Dormg 


Dear Comstock, -What a pity you didn’t turn up on Saturday There were some people I wanted 
you to meet We did tell you it was Saturday and not Thursday this time, didn’t we’ My wife says 
she’s certain she told you Anyway, we’re having another party on the twenty-third, a sort of 
before-Christmas party, about the same time Won’t you come then’ Don’t forget the date this 
time 

Yours 

Paul Doring 

A painful convulsion happened below Gordon’s ribs So Doring was 
pretending that it was all a mistake-was pretending not to have insulted him 1 
True, he could not actually have gone there on Saturday, because on Saturday 
he had to be at the shop; still, it was the intention that counted 
His heart sickened as he re-read the words ‘some people I wanted you to 
meet’ Just like his bloody luck' He thought of the people he might have 
met-editors of highbrow magazines, for instance They might have given him 
books to review or asked to see his poems or Lord knew what For a moment he 
was dreadfully tempted to believe that Dormg had spoken the truth Perhaps 
after all they had told him it was Saturday and not Thursday Perhaps if he 
searched his memory he might remember about lt-might even find the letter 
itself lying among his muddle of papers But no ! He wouldn’t think of it He 
fought down the temptation The Dorings had insulted him on purpose He 
was poor, therefore they had insulted him If you are poor, people will insult 
you It was his creed Stick to it* 

He went across to the table, tearing Dormg’s letter into small bits The 
aspidistra stood in its pot, dull green, ailing, pathetic m its sickly ugliness As 
he sat down, he pulled it towards him and looked at it meditatively There was 
the intimacy of hatred between the aspidistra and him ‘I’ll beat you yet, you 
b — ,’ he whispered to thehusty leaves 
Then he rummagedi among his papers until he found a clean sheet, took his 
pen and wrote in his small, neat hand, right m the middle of the sheet. 

Dear Doring, -With reference to your letter Go and — yourself 

Yours truly 

Gordon Comstock 

~ He stuck it into an envelope, addressed it, and at once went out to get stamps 
ffrom the slot machine. Post it tonight these things look different m the 
morning- He dropped it into the pillar-box So there was another fnend gone 



6 


This woman business 1 What a bore it is' What a pity we can’t cut it right out, or 
at least be like the animals-mmutes of ferocious lust and months of icy 
chastity Take a cock pheasant, for example He jumps up on the hens’ backs 
without so much as a with your leave or by your leave And no sooner it is over 
than the whole subject is out of his mind He hardly even notices his hens any 
longer, he ignores them, or simply pecks them if they come too near his food 
He is not called upon to support his offspring, either. Lucky pheasant 1 How 
different from the lord of creation, always on the hop between his memory and 
his conscience 1 

Tonight Gordon wasn’t even pretending to do any work He had gone out 
again immediately after supper He walked southward, rather slowly, thinking 
about women It was a mild, misty night, more like autumn than winter This 
was Tuesday and he had four and fourpence left He could go down to the 
Crichton if he chose Doubtless Flaxman and his pals were already boozing 
there But the Crichton, which had seemed like paradise when he had no 
money, bored and disgusted him when it was m his power to go there He 
hated the stale, beery place, and the sights, sounds, smells, all so blatantly and 
offensively male. There were no women there, only the barmaid with her lewd 
smile which seemed to promise everything and promised nothing 

Women, women* The mist that hung motionless in the air turned the 
passers-by into ghosts at twenty yards’ distance, but in the little pools of light 
about the lamp-posts there were glimpses of girls’ faces He thought of 
Rosemary, of women m general, and of Rosemary again All afternoon he had 
been thinking of her It was with a kind of resentment that he thought of her 
small, strong body, which he had never yet seen naked How damned unfair it 
is that we are filled to the brim with these tormenting desires and then 
forbidden to satisfy them! Why should one, merely because one has no money, 
be deprived of that> It seems so natural, so necessary, so much a part of the 
inalienable rights of a human being. As he walked down the dark street, 
. through the cold yet languorous air, there was a strangely hopeful feeling m his 
breast. He half believed that somewhere ahead m the darkness a woman’s body 
was waiting for him. But also he knew that no woman was waiting, not even 
Rosemary. It was eight days now since she had even written to him The httle 
beast' Eight whole days without writing' When she knew how much her letters 
meant to him' How manifest it was that she didn’t care for him any longer, that 
he was merely a nuisance to her with his poverty and his shabbiness and: his 



642 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

everlasting pestering of her to say she loved him 1 Very likely she would never 
write again She was sick of him-sick of him because he had no money What 
else could you expect? He had no hold over her No money, therefore no hold 
In the last resort, what holds a woman to any man, except money? 

A girl came down the pavement alone He passed her m the light of the 
lamp-post A working-class girl, eighteen years old it might be, hatless, with 
wildrose face She turned her head quickly when she saw him looking at her 
She dreaded to meet his eyes Beneath the thin silky raincoat she was wearing, 
belted at the waist, her youthful flanks showed supple and trim He could have 
turned and followed her, almost But what was the use? She’d run away or call 
a policeman My golden locks time hath to silver turned, he thought He was 
thirty and moth-eaten What woman worth having would ever look at him 
again? 

This woman business 1 Perhaps you’d feel differently about it if you were 
married? But he had taken an oath against marriage long ago Marriage is only 
a trap set for you by the money-god You grab the bait, snap goes the trap, and 
there you are, chained by the leg to some ‘good’ job till they cart you to Kensal 
Green And what a life 1 Licit sexual intercourse in the shade of the aspidistra 
Pram-pushing and sneaky adulteries And the wife finding you out and 
breaking the cut-glass whisky decanter over your head 

Nevertheless he perceived that in a way it is necessary to marry If marriage 
is bad, the alternative is worse For a moment he wished that he were married, 
he pined for the difficulty of it, the reality, the pain And marriage must be 
indissoluble, for better for worse, for richer for poorer, till death do you part 
The old Christian ideal-marriage tempered by adultery Commit adultery if 
you must, but at any rate have the decency to call it adultery None of that 
American soul-mate slop Have your fun and then sneak home, juice of the 
forbidden fruit dripping from your whiskers, and take the consequences Cut- 
glass whisky decanters broken over your head, nagging, burnt meals, children 
crying, clash and thunder of embattled mothers-m-law Better that, perhaps, 
than horrible freedom? You’d know, at least, that it was real hfe that you were 
living 

But anyway, how can you marry on two quid a week? Money, money, always 
money 1 The devil of it is, that outside marriage, no decent relationship with a 
woman is possible His mind moved backwards, over his ten years of adult life 
The faces of women flowed through his memory Ten or a dozen of them there 
had been Tarts, also Comma au long d 3 un cadavre un cadavre itendu And even 
when they were not tarts it had been squalid, always squalid Always it had 
started in a sort of cold-blooded wilfulness and ended in some mean, callous 
desertion. That, too, was money Without money, you can’t be straightfor- 
ward m your dealings with women For without money, you can’t pick and 
choose, you’ve got to take what women you can get, and then, necessarily, 
you’ve got to break free of them Constancy, like all other virtues, has got to be 
paid for in money. And the mere fact that he had rebelled against the money 
code and wouldn’t settle down in the prison of a ‘good’ job-a thing no woman 
will ever understand -had brought a quality of impermanence, of deception, 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 64 3 

into all his affairs with women Abjuring money, he ought to have abjured 
women to Serve the money-god, or do without women-those are the only 
alternatives And both were equally impossible 

From the side-street just ahead, a shade of white light cut through the mist, 
and there was a bellowing of street hawkers It was Luton Road, where they 
have the open-air market two evenings a week Gordon turned to his left, into 
the market He often came this way The street was so crowded that you could 
only with difficulty thread your way down the cabbage-littered alley between 
the stalls In the glare of hanging electric bulbs, the stuff on the stalls glowed 
with fine lurid colours-hacked, crimson chunks of meat, piles of oranges and 
green and white broccoli, stiff, glassy-eyed rabbits, live eels looping m enamel 
troughs, plucked fowls hanging m rows, sticking out their naked breasts like 
guardsmen naked on parade Gordon’s spirits revived a little He liked the 
noise, the bustle, the vitality Whenever you see a street-market you know 
there’s hope for England yet But even here he felt his solitude Girls were 
thronging everywhere, in knots of four or five, prowling desirously about the 
'stalls of cheap underwear and swapping backchat and screams of laughter with 
the youths who followed them None had eyes for Gordon He walked among 
them as though invisible, save that their bodies avoided him when he passed 
them Ah, look there 1 Involuntarily he paused Over a pile of art-silk undies on 
a stall, three girls were bending, intent, their faces close together-three 
youthful faces, flower-like m the harsh light, clustering side by side like a truss 
of blossom on a Sweet William or phlox His heart stirred No eyes for him, of 
course 1 One girl looked up Ah r Hurriedly, with an offended air, she looked 
away again A delicate flush like a wash of aquarelle flooded her face The hard, 
sexual stare in his eyes had frightened her They flee from me that sometime 
did me seek 1 He walked on If only Rosemary were here 1 He forgave her now 
for not writing to him He could forgive her anything, if only she were here He 
knew how much she meant to him, because she alone of all women was willing 
to save him from the humiliation of his loneliness 
At this moment he looked up, and saw something that made his heart jump 
He changed the focus of his eyes abruptly For a moment he thought he was 
imagining it But no 1 It was Rosemary 1 

She was coming down the alley between the stalls, twenty or thirty yards 
away It was as though his desire had called her into being She had not seen 
him yet She came towards him, a small debonair figure, picking her way 
nimbly through the crowd and the muck underfoot, her face scarcely visible 
because of a flat black hat which she wore cocked down over her eyes like a 
Harrow boy’s straw hat He started towards her and called her name 
‘Rosemary 1 Hi, Rosemary!’ 

A blue-aproned man thumbing codfish on a stall turned to stare at him 
Rosemary did not hear him because of the dm He called again. 

‘Rosemary* I say, Rosemary}’ 

They were only a few yards apart now She started and looked up 
‘Gordon 1 What are you doing here?’ 

‘What ar e you doing here?’ 



644 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

‘I was coming to see you ’ 

‘But how did you know I was here?’ 

‘I didn’t I always come this way I get out of the tube at Camden Town 5 

Rosemary sometimes came to see Gordon at Willowbed Road Mrs 
Wisbeach would inform him sourly that ‘there was a young woman to see him’, 
and he would come downstairs and they would go out for a walk in the streets 
Rosemary was never allowed indoors, not even into the hall That was a rule of 
the house You would have thought ‘young women’ were plague-rats by the 
way Mrs Wisbeach spoke of them Gordon took Rosemary by the upper arm 
and made to pull her against him 

‘Rosemary' oh, what a joy to see you again' I was so vilely lonely Why 
didn’t you come before?’ 

She shook off his hand and stepped back out of his reach Under her slanting 
hat-brim she gave him a glance that was intended to be angry 

‘Let me go, now' I’m very angry with you I very nearly didn’t come after 
that beastly letter you sent me ’ 

‘What beastly letter?’ 

‘You know very well ’ 

‘No, I don’t Oh, well, let’s get out of this Somewhere where we can talk 
This way ’ 

He took her arm, but she shook him off again, continuing however, to walk 
at his side Her steps were quicker and shorter than his And walking beside 
him she had the appearance of something extremely small, nimble, and young, 
as though he had had some lively little animal, a squirrel for instance, frisking 
at his side In reality she was not very much smaller than Gordon, and only a 
few months younger But no one would ever have described Rosemary as a 
spinster of nearly thirty, which m fact she was She was a strong, agile girl, 
with stiff black hair, a small triangular face, and very pronounced eyebrows It 
was one of those small, peaky faces, full of character, which one sees m 
sixteenth-century portraits The first time you saw her take her hat off you got 
a surprise, for on her crown three white hairs glittered among the black ones 
like silver wires It was typical of Rosemary that she never bothered to pull the 
white hairs out She still thought of herself as a very young girl, and so did 
everybody else. Yet if you looked closely the marks of time were plain enough 
on her face 

Gordon walked more boldly with Rosemary at his side He was proud of her 
People were looking at her, and therefore at him as well He was no longer 
invisible to women As always, Rosemary was rather nicely dressed It was a 
mystery how she did it on four pounds a week He liked particularly the hat she 
was wearing-one of those flat felt hats which were then coming into fashion 
and which caricatured a clergyman’s shovel hat. There was something 
essentially frivolous about it. In some way difficult to be described, the angle at 
which it was cocked forward harmonized appealingly with the curve of 
Rosemary’s behind. 

*T like your haf,’ he said 

In spite of herself, a small smile flickered at the corner of her mouth 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 645 

‘It is rather nice,’ she said, giving the hat a little pat with her hand 
She was still pretending to be angry, however She took care that their 
bodies should not touch As soon as they had reached the end of the stalls and 
were m the mam street she stopped and faced him sombrely 
‘What do you mean by writing me letters like that?’ she said 
‘Letters like what?’ 

‘Saying I’d broken your heart ’ 

‘So you have ’ 

‘It looks like it, doesn’t if’ 

‘I don’t know It certainly feels like it ’ 

The words were spoken half jokingly, and yet they made her look more 
closely at him-at his pale, wasted face, his uncut hair, his general down-at- 
heel, neglected appearance Her heart softened instantly, and yet she frowned 
Why won 3 t he take care of himselP was the thought m her mind They had 
moved closer together He took her by the shoulders She let him do it, and, 
putting her small arms round him, squeezed him very hard, partly in affection, 
partly in exasperation 

‘Gordon, you are a miserable creature 1 ’ she said 
‘Why am I a miserable creature?’ 

‘Why can’t you look after yourself properly? You’re a perfect scarecrow 
Look at these awful old clothes you’re wearing 1 ’ 

‘They re suited to my station One can’t dress decently on two quid a week, 
you know ’ 

‘But surely there’s no need to go about looking like a rag-bag? Look at this 
button on your coat, broken in half’ 

She fingered the broken button, then suddenly lifted his discoloured 
Woolworth’s tie aside In some feminine way she had divined that he had no 
buttons on his shirt 

‘Yes, again 1 Not a single button You are awful, Gordon 1 ’ 

‘I tell you I can’t be bothered with things like that I’ve got a soul above 
buttons ’ 

‘But why not give them to me and let me sew them on for you? And, oh, 
Gordon 1 You haven’t even shaved today How absolutely beastly of you You 
might at least take the trouble to shave every morning ’ 

‘I can’t afford to shave every morning,’ he said perversely 

‘What do you mean, Gordon? It doesn’t cost money to shave, does it?’ 

‘Yes, it does Everything costs money Cleanness, decency, energy, self- 
respect-everythmg It’s all money. Haven’t I told you that a million times?’ 
She squeezed his ribs again-she was surprisingly strong-and frowned up at 
him, studying his face as a mother looks at some peevish child of which she is 
unreasonably fond. 

‘ What a fool I am 1 ’ she said 
‘In what way a fool?’ 

‘Because I’m so fond of you,’ 

‘Are you fond of me?’ 

‘Of course I am. You know I am, I adore you It’s idiotic of me 



646 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

‘Then come somewhere where it’s dark I want to kiss you 5 
‘Fancy being kissed by a man who hasn’t even shaved 1 ’ 

‘Well, that’ll be a new experience for you ’ 

‘No, it won’t, Gordon Not after knowing you for two years ’ 

‘Oh, well, come on, anyway ’ 

They found an almost dark alley between the backs of houses All their 
lovemakmg was done m such places The only place where they could ever be 
private was the streets He pressed her shoulders against the rough damp 
bricks of the wall She turned her face readily up to his and clung to him with a 
sort of eager violent affection, like a child And yet all the while, though they 
were body to body, it was as though there were a shield between them She 
kissed him as a child might have done, because she knew that he expected to be 
kissed It was always like this Only at very rare moments could he awake in her 
the beginnings of physical desire, and these she seemed afterwards to forget, so 
that he always had to begin at the beginning over again There was something 
defensive in the feeling of her small, shapely body She longed to know the 
meaning of physical love, but also she dreaded it It would destroy her youth, 
the youthful, sexless world m which she chose to live 
He parted his mouth from hers m order to speak to her 
‘Do you love me?’ he said 

‘Of course, silly Why do you always ask me that?’ 

‘I like to hear you say it Somehow I never feel sure of you till I’ve heard you 
say it ’ 

‘But why?’ 

‘Oh, well, you might have changed your mind After all, I’m not exactly the 
answer to a maiden’s prayer I’m thirty, and moth-eaten at that ’ 

‘Don’t be so absurd, Gordon 1 Anyone would think you were a hundred, to 
hear you talk You know I’m the same age as you are ’ 

‘Yes, but not moth-eaten*’ 

She rubbed her cheek against his, feeling the roughness of his day-old 
beard. Their bellies were close together. He thought of the two years he had 
wanted her and never had her With his lips almost against her ear he 
murmured. 

‘Are you ever going to sleep with me?’ 

‘Yes, some day I will. Not now Some day ’ 

‘It’s always “some day” It’s been “some day” for two years now ’ 

‘I know But I can’t help it.’ 

He pressed her back against the wall, pulled off the absurd fiat hat, and 
buried his face m her hair It was tormenting to be so close to her and all for 
nothing He put a hand under her chm and lifted her small face up to his, 
trying to distinguish her features m the almost complete darkness. 

‘Say you will, Rosemary, There’s a dear 1 Do 1 * 

*You know I’m going to some time ’ 

‘Yes, but not some time-now I don’t mean this moment, but soon When we 
get an opportunity Say you will 1 ’ 

T can’t I can’t promise ’ 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 647 

‘Say “yes,” Rosemary please do 1 ’ 

‘No 5 

Still stroking her invisible face, he quoted 

‘Veuillez le dire done selon 
Que vous estes bemgne et doulche, 

Car ce doulx mot n’est pas si long 
Qu’il vous face mal en la bouche ’ 

‘What does that mean’’ 

He translated it 

‘I can’t, Gordon I just can’t ’ 

‘Say “yes,” Rosemary, there’s a dear Surely it’s as easy to say “yes” as 
“no”’’ 

‘No, it isn’t It’s easy enough for you You’re a man It’s different for a 
woman ’ 

‘Say “yes,” Rosemary 1 “Yes”- it’s such an easy word Go on, now, say it 
“Yes'” ’ 

‘Anyone would think you were teaching a parrot to talk, Gordon ’ 

‘Oh, damn 1 Don’t make jokes about it ’ 

It was not much use arguing Presently they came out into the street and 
walked on, southward Somehow, from Rosemary’s swift, neat movements, 
from her general air of a girl who knows how to look after herself and who yet 
treats life mainly as a joke, you could make a good guess at her upbringing and 
her mental background She was the youngest child of one of those huge* 
hungry families which still exist here and there m the middle classes There 
had been fourteen children all told-the father was a country solicitor Some of 
Rosemary’s sisters were married, some of them were schoolmistresses or 
running typing bureaux, the brothers were farming in Canada, on tea- 
plantations m Ceylon, m obscure regiments of the Indian Army Like all 
women who have had an eventful girlhood, Rosemary wanted to remain a girl 
That was why, sexually, she was so immature She had kept late into life the 
high-spirited sexless atmosphere of a big family Also she had absorbed into 
her very bones the code of fair play and live-and-let-hve She was profoundly 
magnanimous, quite mcapable of spiritual bullying From Gordon, whom she 
adored, she put up with almost anything It was the measure of her 
magnanimity that never once, in the two years that she had known him, had 
she blamed him for not attempting to earn a proper living 

Gordon was aware of all this. But at the moment he was thinking of other 
things In the pallid circles of light about the lamp-posts, beside Rosemary’s 
smaller, trimmer figure, he felt graceless, shabby, and dirty He wished very 
much that he had shaved that morning Furtively he put a hand into his pocket 
and felt his money, half afraid-it was a recurrent fear with him-that he might 
have dropped a com. However, he could feel the milled edge of a flonn, his 
principal com at the moment Four and fourpence left He couldn’t possibly 
take her out to supper, he reflected They’d have to trail dismally up and down 
the streets, as usual, or at best go to a Lyons for a coffee. Bloody l How can you 



648 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

have any fun when you’ve got no moneys He said broodmgly 
‘Of course it all comes back to money 5 

This remark came out of the blue She looked up at him in surprise 
‘What do you mean, it all comes back to money- 5 ’ 

‘I mean the way nothing ever goes right m my life It’s always money, 
money, money that’s at the bottom of everything And especially between me 
and you That’s why you don’t really love me There’s a sort of film of money 
between us I can feel it every time I kiss you ’ 

‘Money' What has money got to do with it, Gordon?’ 

‘Money’s got to do with everything If I had more money you’d love me 
more ’ 

‘Of course, I wouldn’t 1 Why should P’ 

‘You couldn’t help it Don’t you see that if I had more money I’d be more 
worth loving? Look at me now 1 Look at my face, look at these clothes I’m 
wearing, look at everything else about me Do you suppose I’d be like that if I 
had two thousand a year? If I had more money I should be a different person ’ 
‘If you were a different person I shouldn’t love you ’ 

‘That’s nonsense, too But look at it like this If we were married would you 
sleep with me?’ 

‘What questions you do ask ! Of course I would Otherwise, where would be 
the sense of being married?’ 

‘Well then, suppose I was decently well off, would you marry me?’ 

‘What’s the good of talking about it, Gordon? You know we can’t afford to 
marry ’ 

‘Yes, but if we could. Would you?’ 

‘I don’t know Yes, I would, I dare say ’ 

‘There you are, then! That’s what I said-money 1 ’ 

‘No, Gordon, no 1 That’s not fair 1 You’re twisting my words round ’ 

‘No, I’m not You’ve got this money-business at the bottom of your heart 
Every woman’s got it You wish I was in a good job now, don’t you?’ 

‘Not m the way you mean it I’d like you to be earning more money-yes ’ 
‘And you think I ought to have stayed on at the New Albion, don’t you? 
You’d like me to go back there now and wnte slogans for Q,T Sauce and 
Truweet Breakfast Crisps Wouldn’t you^’ 

‘No, I wouldn’t, I never said that ’ 

‘You thought it, though It’s what any woman would think ’ 

He was being horribly unfair, and he knew it The one thing Rosemary had 
never said, the thing she was probably quite incapable of saying, was that he 
ought to go bade to the New Albion But for the moment he did not even want 
to be fair. His sexual disappointment still pricked him With a sort of 
melancholy triumph he reflected that, after all, he was right It was money that 
stood between them. Money, money, all is money! He broke into a half-serious 
tirade: 

‘Women! What nonsense they make of all our ideas 1 Because one can’t keep 
free of women, and every woman makes one pay the same price. “Ghuck away 
your decency sand make more money” -that’s what women say. “Chuck away 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 649 

your decency, suck the blacking off the boss’s boots, and buy me a better fur 
coat than the woman next door ” Every man you can see has got some blasted 
woman hanging round his neck like a mermaid, dragging him down and 
down-down to some beastly little semi-detached villa m Putney, with hire- 
purchase furniture and a portable radio and an aspidistra m the window It’s 
women who make all progress impossible Not that I believe in progress,’ he 
added rather unsatisfactorily 

‘What absolute nonsense you do talk, Gordon 1 As though women were to 
blame for everything 1 ’ 

‘They are to blame, finally Because it’s the women who really believe in the 
money-code The men obey it, they have to, but they don’t believe in it It’s 
the women who keep it going The women and their Putney villas and their fur 
coats and their babies and their aspidistras ’ 

‘It is not the women, Gordon 1 Women didn’t invent money, did they’’ 

‘It doesn’t matter who invented it, the point is that it’s women who worship 
it. A woman’s got a sort of mystical feeling towards money Good and evil m a 
women’s mind mean simply money and no money Look at you and me You 
won’t sleep with me, simply and solely because I’ve got no money Yes, that is 
the reason (He squeezed her arm to silence her ) You admitted it only a minute 
ago And if I had a decent income you’d go to bed with me tomorrow It’s not 
because you’re mercenary You don’t want me to pay you for sleeping with 
me It’s not so crude as that But you’ve got that deep-down mystical feeling 
that somehow a man without money isn’t worthy of you He’s a weakling, a 
sort of half-man-that’s how you feel Hercules, god of strength and god of 
money-you’ll find that in Lempri6re It’s women who keep all mythologies 
going Women 1 ’ 

‘Women!’ echoed Rosemary on a different note ‘I hate the way men are 
always talking about women “Women do this,” and “ Women do that”-as 
though all women were exactly the same 1 ’ 

‘Of course all women are the same 1 What does any woman want except a safe 
income and two babies and a semi-detached villa m Putney with an aspidistra 
m the window’’ 

‘Oh, you and your aspidistras*’ 

‘On the contrary, your aspidistras You’re the sex that cultivates them ’ 

She squeezed his arm and burst out laughing. She was really extraordinarily 
good-natured Besides, what he was saying was such palpable nonsense that it 
did not even exasperate her Gordon’s diatribes against women were in reality 
a kind of perverse joke, indeed, the whole sex-war is at bottom only a joke For 
the same reason it is great fun to pose as a feminist or an anti-feminist 
according to your sex As they walked on they began a violent argument upon 
the eternal and idiotic question of Man versus Woman. The moves in this 
argument-for they had it as often as they met-were always very much the 
same Men are brutes and women are soulless, and women have always been 
kept in subjection and they jolly well ought to be kept in subjection, and look at 
Patient Gnselda and took at Lady Astor, and what about polygamy and Hindu 
widows, and what about Mother Pankhurst’s piping days when every decent 



6 50 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

woman wore mousetraps on her garters and couldn’t look at a man without 
feeling her right hand itch for a castrating knife’ Gordon and Rosemary never 
grew tired of this kind of thing Each laughed with delight at the other’s 
absurdities There was a merry war between them Even as they disputed, arm 
in arm, they pressed their bodies delightedly together They were very happy 
Indeed, they adored one another. Each was to the other a standing joke and an 
object infinitely precious Presently a red and blue haze of Neon lights 
appeared m the distance They had reached the beginning of the Tottenham 
Court Road Gordon put his arm round her waist and turned her to the right, 
down a darkish side-street They were so happy together that they had got to 
kiss They stood clasped together under the lamp-post, still laughing, two 
enemies breast to breast She rubbed her cheek against his 
‘Gordon, you are such a dear old ass' I can’t help loving you, scrubby jaw 
and all ’ 

‘Do you really’’ 

‘Really and truly ’ 

Her arms still round him, she leaned a little backwards, pressing her belly 
against his with a sort of innocent voluptuousness 
‘Life is worth living, isn’t it , Gordon’’ 

‘Sometimes ’ 

‘If only we could meet a bit oftener* Sometimes I don’t see you for weeks ’ 
‘I know It’s bloody If you knew how I hate my evenings alone 1 ’ 

‘One never seems to have time for anything I don’t even leave that beastly 
office till nearly seven What do you do with yourself on Sundays, Gordon’’ 
‘Oh, God 1 Moon about and look miserable, like everyone else ’ 

‘Why not let’s go out for a walk in the country sometimes Then we would 
have all day together Next Sunday, for instance’’ 

The words chilled him They brought back the thought of money, which he 
had succeeded in putting out of his mind for half an hour past A trip into the 
country would cost money, far more than he could possibly afford He said m a 
non-committal tone that transferred the whole thing to the realm of 
abstraction 

‘Of course, it’s not too bad in Richmond Park on Sundays Or even 
Hampstead Heath Especially if you go in the mornings before the crowds get 
there ’ 

‘Oh, but do let’s go right out into the country 1 Somewhere m Surrey, for 
instance, or to Burnham Beeches It’s so lovely at this time of year, with all the 
dead leaves on the ground, and you can walk all day and hardly meet a soul 
We’ll walk for miles and miles and have dinner at a pub It would be such fun. 
Do let’s 1 ’ 

Blast! The money-business was coming back A trip even as far as Burnham 
Beeches would cost all of ten bob He did some hurried arithmetic Five bob he 
might manage, and Julia would ‘lend’ him five, give him five, that was At the 
same moment he remembered his oath, constantly renewed and always 
broken, not to ‘borrow’ money off Julia He said in the same casual tone as 
before* 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 651 

‘It would be rather fun I should think we might manage it I’ll let you know 
later in the week, anyway ’ 

They came out of the side-street, still arm in arm There was a pub on the 
corner Rosemary stood on tiptoe, and, clinging to Gordon’s arm to support 
herself, managed to look over the frosted lower half of the window 

‘Look, Gordon, there’s a clock m there It’s nearly half past nine Aren’t you 
getting frightfully hungry?’ 

‘No,’ he said instantly and untruthfully 

‘I am I’m simply starving Let’s go and have something to eat somewhere ’ 
Money again* One moment more, and he must confess that he had only four 
and fourpence m the world-four and fourpence to last till Friday 
‘I couldn’t eat anything,’ he said ‘I might manage a drink, I dare say Let’s 
go and have some coffee or something I expect we’ll find a Lyons open ’ 

‘Oh, don’t let’s go to a Lyons* I know such a nice little Italian restaurant, 
only just down the road We’ll have Spaghetti Napolitaine and a bottle of red 
wine I adore spaghetti Do let’s*’ 

His heart sank It was no good He would have to own up Supper at the 
Italian Restaurant could not possibly cost less than five bob for the two of 
them He said almost sullenly 

‘It’s about time I was getting home, as a matter of fact ’ 

‘Oh, Gordon* Already? Why?’ 

‘Oh, well* If you must know. I’ve only got four and fourpence in the world 
And it’s got to last till Friday ’ 

Rosemary stopped short She was so angry that she pinched his arm with all 
her strength, meaning to hurt him and punish him 

‘Gordon, you are an ass! You’re a perfect idiot* You’re the most unspeakable 
idiot I’ve ever seen*’ 

‘Why am I an idiot?’ 

‘Because what does it matter whether you’ve got any money* I’m asking j/ow 
to have supper with me ’ 

He freed his arm from hers and stood away from her He did not want to look 
her m the face 

‘What* Do you think I’d go to a restaurant and let you pay for my food?’ 
‘But why not?’ 

‘Because one can’t do that sort of thing It isn’t done ’ 

‘It “isn’t done”* You’ll be saying it’s “not cricket” m another moment 
What “isn’t done”?’ 

‘Letting you pay for my meals A man pays for a woman, a woman doesn’t 
pay for a man * 

‘Oh, Gordon* Are we living in the reign of Queen Victoria?’ 

‘Yes, we are, as far as that kind of thing’s concerned Ideas don’t change so 
quickly ’ 

‘But my ideas have changed.’ 

‘No, they haven’t. You think they have, but they haven’t You’ve been 
brought up as a woman, and you can’t help behaving like a woman, however 
much you don’t want to ’ 



552 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

‘But what do you mean by behaving like a woman , anyway-*’ 

‘I tell you every woman’s the same when it comes to a thing like this A 
woman despises a man who’s dependent on her and sponges on her She may 
say she doesn’t, she may think she doesn’t, but she does She can’t help it If I 
let you pay for my meals you’d despise me 5 
He had turned away He knew how abominably he was behaving But 
somehow he had got to say these things The feeling that people-even 
Rosemary-wmsr despise him for his poverty was too strong to be overcome 
Only by rigid, jealous independence could he keep his self-respect Rosemary 
was really distressed this time She caught his arm and pulled him round, 
making him face her With an insistent gesture, angrily and yet demanding to 
be loved, she pressed her breast against him 
‘Gordon 1 1 won’t let you say such things How can you say I’d ever despise 
you?’ 

‘I tell you you couldn’t help it if I let myself sponge on you ’ 

‘Sponge on me' What expressions you do use' How is it sponging on me to 
let me pay for your supper just for once 1 ’ 

He could feel the small breasts, firm and round, just beneath his own She 
looked up at him, frowning and yet not far from tears She thought him 
perverse, unreasonable, cruel But her physical nearness distracted him At 
this moment all he could remember was that in two years she had never yielded 
to him She had starved him of the one thing that mattered What was the good 
of pretending that she loved him when m the last essential she recoiled? He 
added with a kind of deadly joy 

‘In a way you do despise me Oh, yes, I know you’re fond of me But after all, 
you can’t take me quite seriously I’m a kind of joke to you You’re fond of me, 
and yet I’m not quite your equal-that’s how you feel ’ 

It was what he had said before, but with this difference, that now he meant 
it, or said it as if he meant it She cried out with tears in her voice 
‘I don’t, Gordon, I don’t 1 You know I don’t 1 ’ 

‘You do That’s why you won’t sleep with me Didn’t I tell you that before?’ 
She looked up at him an instant longer, and then buried her face m his breast 
as suddenly as though ducking from a blow It was because she had burst into 
tears She wept against his breast, angry with him, hating him, and yet clinging 
to him like a child It was the childish way m which she clung to him, as a mere 
male breast to weep on, that hurt him most With a sort of self-hatred he 
remembered the other women who in just the same way had cried against his 
breast. It seemed the only thing he could do with women, to make them cry 
With his arm round her shoulders he caressed he* clumsily, trying to console 
her 

‘You’ve gone and made me cry*’ she whimpered m self-contempt 
Tm sorry! Rosemary, dear one] Don’t cry, please don’t cry ’ 

‘Gordon, dearest 1 Why do you have to be so beastly to me?’ 

‘I’m sorry. I’m sorry 1 Sometimes I can’t help it ’ 

‘But why? Why?’ 

She had got over her crying. Rather more composed, she drew away from 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 6 S3 

him and felt for something to wipe her eyes Neither of them had a 
handkerchief Impatiently, she wrung the tears out of her eyes with her 
knuckles 

‘How silly we always are* Now, Gordon, be nice for once Come along to the 
restaurant and have some supper and let me pay for it ’ 

‘No ’ 

‘Just this once Never mind about the old money-business Do it just to 
please me ’ 

‘I tell you I can’t do that kind of thing I’ve got to keep my end up ’ 

‘But what do you mean, keep your end up^’ 

‘I’ve made a war on money, and I’ve got to keep the rules The first rule is 
never to take charity ’ 

‘Chanty' Oh, Gordon, I do think you’re silly 1 ’ 

She squeezed his ribs again It was a sign of peace She did not understand 
him, probably never would understand him, yet she accepted him as he was, 
hardly even protesting against his unreasonableness As she put her face up to 
be kissed he noticed that her lips were salt A tear had trickled here He 
strained her against him The hard defensive feeling had gone out of her body 
She shut her eyes and sank against him and into him as though her bones had 
grown weak, and her lips parted and her small tongue sought for his It was 
very seldom that she did that And suddenly, as he felt her body yielding, he 
seemed to know with certainty that their struggle was ended She was his now 
when he chose to take her, and yet perhaps she did not fully understand what it 
was that she was offering, it was simply an instinctive movement of generosity, 
a desire to reassure him-to smooth away that hateful feeling of being 
unloveable and unloved She said nothing of this m words It was the feeling of 
her body that seemed to say it But even if this had been the time and the place 
he could not have taken her At this moment he loved her but did not desire 
her His desire could only return at some future time when there was no 
quarrel fresh in his mind and no consciousness of four and fourpence m his 
pocket to daunt him 

Presently they separated their mouths, though still clinging closely together 
‘How stupid it is, the way we quarrel, isn’t it Gordon’ When we meet so 
seldom ’ 

‘I know It’s all my fault I can’t help it Things rub me up It’s money at the 
bottom of it, always money ’ 

‘Oh, money' You let it worry you too much, Gordon,’ 

‘Impossible It’s the only thing worth worrying about ’ 

‘But, anyway, we mil go out into the country next Sunday, won’t we’ To 
Burnham Beeches or somewhere It would be so nice if we could ’ 

‘Yes, I’d love to We’ll go early and be out all day I’ll raise the tram fares 
somehow.’ 

‘But you’ll let me pay my own fare, won’t you?’ 

‘No, I’d rather I paid them, but we’ll go, anyway,’ 

‘And you really won’t let me pay for your supper-just this once, just to show 
you trust me?’ 



6 54 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

‘No, I can’t I’m sorry I’ve told you why ’ 

‘Oh, dear 1 1 suppose we shall have to say good night It’s getting late ’ 
They stayed talking a long time, however, so long that Rosemary got no 
supper after all She had to be back at her lodgings by eleven, or the she- 
dragons were angry Gordon went to the top of the Tottenham Court Road 
and took the tram It was a penny cheaper than taking the bus On the wooden 
seat upstairs he was wedged against a small dirty Scotchman who read the 
football finals and oozed beer Gordon was very happy Rosemary was going to 
be his mistress Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over To the music of the 
tram’s booming he whispered the seven completed stanzas of his poem Nine 
stanzas there would be in all It was good He believed m it and m himself He 
was a poet Gordon Comstock, author of Mice Even m London Pleasures he 
once again believed 

He thought of Sunday They were to meet at mne o’clock at Paddington 
Station Ten bob or so it would cost, he would raise the money if he had to 
pawn his shirt And she was going to become his mistress, this very Sunday, 
perhaps, if the right chance offered itself Nothing had been said Only, 
somehow, it was agreed between them 
Please God it kept fine on Sunday 1 It was deep winter now What luck if it 
turned out one of those splendid windless days-one of those days that might 
almost be summer, when you can lie for hours on the dead bracken and never 
feel cold 1 But you don’t get many days like that, a dozen at most m every 
winter. As likely as not it would ram He wondered whether they would get a 
chance to do it after all They had nowhere to go, except the open air There are 
so many pairs of lovers in London with ‘nowhere to go’, only the streets and 
the parks, where there is no privacy and it is always cold It is not easy to make 
love m a cold climate when you have no money The ‘never the time and the 
place’ motif is not made enough of m novels 


7 


The plumes of the chimneys floated perpendicular against skies of smoky rose 

Gordon caught the 27 bus at ten past eight. The streets were still locked in 
their Sunday sleep On the doorsteps the milk bottles waited ungathered like 
little white sentinels. Gordon had fourteen shillings in his hand-thirteen and 
nine, rather, because the bus fare was threepence Nine bob he had set aside 
from his wages- God knew what that was going to mean, later m the 
week!— and five he had borrowed from Julia. 

He had gone round to Julia's place on Thursday night Julia’s room in Earl’s 
Court, though only a second-floor back, was not just a vulgar bedroom like 
Gordon’s. It was a bed-sitting with the accent on the sitting Julia would have 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 65s 

died of starvation sooner than put up with such squalor as Gordon lived in 
Indeed every one of her scraps of furniture, collected over intervals of years, 
represented a period of semi-starvation There was a divan bed that could very 
nearly be mistaken for a sofa, and a little round fumed oak table, and two 
‘antique’ hardwood chairs, and an ornamental footstool and a chintz-covered 
armchair-Drage’s thirteen monthly payments-in front of the tiny gas-fire, 
and there were various brackets with framed photos of father and mother and 
Gordon and Aunt Angela, and a birchwood calendar-somebody’s Christmas 
present- with ‘It’s a long lane that has no turning’ done on it in pokerwork 
Julia depressed Gordon horribly He was always telling himself that he ought 
to go and see her oftener, but in practice he never went near her except to 
‘borrow’ money 

When Gordon had given three knocks-three knocks for second floor-Julia 
took him up to her room and knelt down m front of the gas-fire 

‘I’ll light the fire again,’ she said ‘You’d like a cup of tea, wouldn’t you?’ 
He noted the ‘again’ The room was beastly cold-no fire had been lighted in 
it this evening Julia always ‘saved gas’ when she was alone He looked at her 
long narrow back as she knelt down How grey her hair was getting 1 Whole 
locks of it were quite grey A little more, and it would be ‘grey hair’ tout court 
‘You like your tea strong, don’t you?’ breathed Julia, hovering over the tea- 
caddy with tender, goose-like movements 

Gordon drank his cup of tea standing up, his eye on the birchwood calendar 
Out with it' Get it over 1 Yet his heart almost failed him The meanness of this 
hateful cadging 1 What would it all tot up to, the money he had ‘borrowed’ from 
her in all these years? 

‘I say, Julia, I’m damned sorry-I hate asking you, but look here-’ 

‘Yes, Gordon?’ she said quietly. She knew what was coming 
‘Look here, Julia, I’m damned sorry, but could you lend me five bob?’ 

‘Yes, Gordon, I expect so ’ 

She sought out the small, worn black leather purse that was hidden at the 
bottom of her linen drawer He knew what she was thinking It meant less for 
Christmas presents That was the great event of her life nowadays- Christmas 
and the giving of presents hunting through the glittering streets, late at night 
after the teashop was shut, from one bargain counter to another, picking out 
the trash that women are so curiously fond of Handkerchief sachets, letter 
racks, teapots, manicure sets, birchwood calendars with mottoes in pokerwork 
All through the year she was scraping from her wretched wages for ‘So-and- 
so’s Christmas present’, or ‘So-and-so’s birthday present’ And had she not, 
last Christmas, because Gordon was ‘fond of poetry’, given him the Selected 
Poems of John Dnnkwater m green morocco, which he had sold for half a 
crown? Poor Julia ! Gordon made off with his five bob as soon as he decently 
could Why is it that one can’t borrow from a rich friend and can from a half- 
starved relative? But one’s family, of course, ‘don’t count’ 

On the top of the bus he did mental arithmetic Thirteen and nine in hand 
Two day-returns to Slough, five bob Bus fares, say two bob more, seven bob. 
Bread and cheese and beer at a pub, say a bob each, nine bob Tea, eightpence 



6 $6 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

each, twelve bob A bob for cigarettes, thirteen bob That left mnepence for 
emergencies They would manage all right And how about the rest of the 
week? Not a penny for tobacco 1 But he refused to let it worry him Today 
would be worth it, anyway 

Rosemary met him on time It was one of her virtues that she was never late, 
and even at this hour of the morning she was bright and debonair She was 
rather mcely dressed, as usual She was wearing her mock-shovel hat again, 
because he had said he liked it They had the station practically to themselves 
The huge grey place, littered and deserted, had a blowsy, unwashed air, as 
though it were still sleeping off a Saturday night debauch A yawning porter in 
need of a shave told them the best way to get to Burnham Beeches, and 
presently they were m a third-class smoker, rolling westward, and the mean 
wilderness of London was opening out and giving way to narrow sooty fields 
dotted with ads for Carter’s Little Liver Pills The day was very still and 
warm Gordon’s prayer had come true It was one of those windless days 
which you can hardly tell from summer You could feel the sun behind the 
mist, it would break through presentiy, with any luck Gordon and Rosemary 
were profoundly and rather absurdly happy There was a sense of wild 
adventure in getting out of London, with the long day m ‘the country’ 
stretching out ahead of them It was months since Rosemary and a year since 
Gordon had set foot m ‘the country’ They sat close together with the Sunday 
Times open across their knees, they did not read it, however, but watched the 
fields and cows and houses and the empty goods trucks and great sleeping 
factories rolling past. Both of them enjoyed the railway journey so much that 
they wished it had been longer 

At Slough they got out and travelled to Farnham Common m an absurd 
chocolate-coloured bus with no top Slough was still half asleep Rosemary 
remembered the way now that they had got to Farnham Common You walked 
down a rutted road and came out on to stretches of fine, wet, tussocky grass 
dotted with little naked birches The beech woods were beyond Not a bough 
or a blade was stirring The trees stood like ghosts m the still, misty air Both 
Rosemary and Gordon exclaimed at the loveliness of everything The dew, the 
stillness, the satiny stems of the birches, the softness of the turf under your 
feet* Nevertheless, at first they felt shrunken and out of place, as Londoners do 
when they get outside London Gordon felt as though he had been living 
underground for a long time past He felt etiolated and unkempt He slipped 
behind Rosemary as they walked, so that she should not see his lined, 
colourless face Also, they were out of breath before they had walked far, 
because they were only used to London walking, and for the first half hour they 
scarcely talked. They plunged into the woods and started westward, with not 
much idea of where they ware making for-anywhere, so long as it was away 
from London. All round them the beech-trees soared, curiously phallic with 
their smooth skin-like bark and their fiutmgs at the base. Nothing grew at their 
roots, but the dried leaves were strewn so thickly that m the distance the slopes 
locked like folds of copper-coloured silk. Not a soul seemed to be awake. 
Gordon came level with Rosemary* They walked on hand m hand. 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 657 

swishing through the dry coppery leaves that had drifted into the ruts 
Sometimes they came out on to stretches of road where they passed huge 
desolate houses-opulent country houses, once, in the carriage days, but now 
deserted and unsaleable Down the road the mist-dimmed hedges wore that 
strange purplish brown, the colour of brown madder, that naked brushwood 
takes on m winter There were a few birds about-jays, sometimes, passing 
between the trees with dipping flight, and pheasants that loitered across the 
road with long tails trailing, almost as tame as hens, as though knowing they 
were safe on Sunday But m half an hour Gordon and Rosemary had not 
passed a human being Sleep lay upon the countryside It was hard to believe 
that they were only twenty miles out of London 

Presently they had walked themselves into trim They had got their second 
wind and the blood glowed m their veins It was one of those days when you 
feel you could walk a hundred miles if necessary Suddenly, as they came out 
on to the road again, the dew all down the hedge glittered with a diamond flash 
The sun had pierced the clouds The light came slanting and yellow across the 
fields, and delicate unexpected colours sprang out m everything, as though 
some giant’s child had been let loose with a new paintbox Rosemary caught 
Gordon’s arm and pulled him against her 
‘Oh, Gordon, what a lovely day 1 ’ 

‘Lovely ’ 

‘And, oh, look, look' Look at all the rabbits in that field!’ 

Sure enough, at the other end of the field, innumerable rabbits were 
browsing, almost like a flock of sheep Suddenly there was a flurry under the 
hedge A rabbit had been lying there It leapt from its nest m the grass with a 
flirt of dew and dashed away down the field, its white tail lifted Rosemary 
threw herself mto Gordon’s arms It was astonishingly warm, as warm as 
summer They pressed their bodies together in a sort of sexless rapture, like 
children Here m the open air he could see the marks of time quite clearly upon 
her face She was nearly thirty, and looked it, and he was nearly thirty, and 
looked more, and it mattered nothing He pulled off the absurd flat hat. The 
three white hairs gleamed on her crown At the moment he did not wish them 
away They were part of her and therefore lovable 
‘What fun to be here alone with you 1 I’m so glad we came 1 ’ 

‘And, oh, Gordon, to think we’ve got all day together 1 And it might so easily 
have rained How lucky we are*’ 

‘Yes We’ll burn a sacrifice to the immortal gods, presently ’ 

They were extravagantly happy. As they walked on they fell mto absurd 
enthusiasms over everything they saw over a jay’s feather that they picked up, 
blue as lapis lazuli, over a stagnant pool like a jet mirror, with boughs reflected 
deep down in it; over the fungi that sprouted from the trees like monstrous 
horizontal ears. They discussed for a long time what would be the best epithet 
to describe a beech-tree. Both agreed that beeches look more like sentient 
creatures than other trees It is because of the smoothness of their bark, 
probably, and the curious limb-like way in which the boughs sprout from the 
trunk. Gordon said that the little knobs on the bark were like the nipples of 



658 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

breasts and that the sinuous upper boughs, with their smooth sooty skin, were 
like the writhing trunks of elephants They argued about similes and 
metaphors From time to time they quarrelled vigorously, according to their 
custom Gordon began to tease her by finding ugly similes for everything they 
passed He said that the russet foliage of the hornbeams was like the hair of 
Burne-Jones maidens, and that the smooth tentacles of the ivy that wound 
about the trees were like the clinging arms of Dickens heroines Once he 
insisted upon destroying some mauve toadstools because he said they 
reminded him of a Rackham illustration and he suspected fairies of dancing 
round them Rosemary called him a soulless pig She waded through a bed of 
drifted beech leaves that rustled about her, knee-deep, like a weightless red- 
gold sea 

‘Oh, Gordon, these leaves' Look at them with the sun on them' They’re like 
gold They really are like gold ’ 

‘Fairy gold You’ll be going all Barrie in another moment As a matter of 
fact, if you want an exact simile, they’re just the colour of tomato soup ’ 
‘Don’t be a pig, Gordon' Listen how they rustle “Thick as autumnal leaves 
that strow the brooks m Vallombrosa ” ’ 

‘Or like one of those American breakfast cereals Truweet Breakfast Crisps 
“Kiddies clamour for their Breakfast Crisps *” 

‘You are a beast'’ 

She laughed They walked on hand m hand, swishing ankle-deep through 
the leaves and declaiming 

‘Thick as the Breakfast Crisps that strow tne plates 
In Welwyn Garden City 1 ’ 

It was great fun Presently they came out of the wooded area There were 
plenty of people abroad now, but not many cars if you kept away from the mam 
roads. Sometimes they heard church bells ringing and made detours to avoid 
the churchgoers They began to pass through straggling villages on whose 
outskirts pseudo-Tudor villas stood smffishly apart, amid their garages, their 
laurel shrubberies and their raw-looking lawns And Gordon had some fun 
railing against the villas and the godless civilization of which they were part-a 
civilization of stockbrokers and their lip-sticked wives, of golf, whisky, ouija- 
boards, and Aberdeen terriers called Jock So they walked another four miles 
or so, talking and frequently quarrelling A few gauzy clouds were drifting 
across the sky, but there was hardly a breath of wind 
They were growing rather footsore and more and more hungry Of its own 
accord the conversation began to turn upon food Neither of them had a watch, 
but when they passed through a village they saw that the pubs were open, so 
that it must be after twelve o’clock They hesitated outside a rather low- 
looking pub called the Bird m Hand Gordon was for going in, privately he 
reflected that in a pub like that your bread and cheese and beer would cost you 
a bob at the very most But Rosemary said that it was a nasty-lookmg place, 
which indeed it was, and they went on, hoping to find a pleasanter pub at the 
other end of the village. They had visions of a cosy bar-parlour, with an oak 
settle and perhaps a stuffed pike m a glass case on the wall 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 65 9 

But there were no more pubs in the village, and presently they were in open 
country again, with no houses m sight and not even any signposts Gordon and 
Rosemary began to be alarmed At two the pubs would shut, and then there 
would be no food to be had, except perhaps a packet of biscuits from some 
village sweetshop At this thought a ravening hunger took possession of them 
They toiled exhaustedly up an enormous hill, hoping to find a village on the 
other side There was no village, but far below a dark green river wound, with 
what seemed quite like a large town scattered along its edge and a grey bridge 
crossing it They did not even know what river it was-it was the Thames, of 
course 

‘Thank God 1 ’ said Gordon ‘There must be plenty of pubs down there 
We’d better take the first one we can find 5 
‘Yes, do let’s I’m starving ’ 

But when they neared the town it seemed strangely quiet Gordon wondered 
whether the people were all at church or eating their Sunday dinners, until he 
realized that the place was quite deserted It was Crickham-on-Thames, one of 
those riverside towns which live for the boating season and go into hibernation 
for the rest of the year It straggled along the bank for a mile or more, and it 
consisted entirely of boat-houses and bungalows, all of them shut up and 
empty There were no signs of life anywhere At last, however, they came upon 
a fat, aloof, red-nosed man, with a ragged moustache, sitting on a camp-stool 
beside a jar of beer on the towpath He was fishing with a twenty-foot roach 
pole, while on the smooth green water two swans circled about his float, trying 
to steal his bait as often as he pulled it up 

‘Can you tell us where we can get something to eat?’ said Gordon 
The fat man seemed to have been expecting this question and to derive a sort 
of private pleasure from it He answered without looking at Gordon 
‘ You won’t get nothing to eat Not here you won’t,’ he said 
‘But dash it* Do you mean to say there isn’t a pub in the whole place? We’ve 
walked all the way from Farnham Common ’ 

The fat man sniffed and seemed to reflect, still keeping his eye on the float 
‘I dessay you might try the Ravenscroft Hotel,’ he said. ‘About half a mile 
along, that is. I dessay they’d give you something, that is, they would if they 
was open ’ 

‘But are they open?’ 

‘They might be and they might not,’ said the fat man comfortably 
‘And can you tell us what time it is?’ said Rosemary 
‘It’s jest gone ten parse one ’ 

The two swans followed Gordon and Rosemary a little way along the 
towpath, evidently expecting to be fed There did not seem much hope that the 
Ravenscroft Hotel would be open The whole place had that desolate flyblown 
air of pleasure resorts m the off-season The woodwork of the bungalows was 
cracking, the white paint was peeling off, the dusty wmdows showed bare 
interiors Even the slot machines that were dotted along the bank were out of 
order There seemed to be another bridge at the other end of the town Gordon 
swore heartily. 



66o Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

‘What bloody fools we were not to go in that pub when we had the chance' 5 

‘Oh, dear' I’m simply starving Had we better turn back, do you think’’ 

‘It’s no use, there were no pubs the way we came We must keep on I 
suppose the Ravenscroft Hotel’s on the other side of that bridge If that’s a 
main road there’s just a chance it’ll be open Otherwise we’re sunk ’ 

They dragged their way as far as the bridge They were thoroughly footsore 
now But behold' here at last was what they wanted, for just beyond the bridge, 
down a sort of private road, stood a biggish, smartish hotel, its back lawns 
running down to the river It was obviously open Gordon and Rosemary 
started eagerly towards it, and then paused, daunted 

‘It looks frightfully expensive,’ said Rosemary 

It did look expensive It was a vulgar pretentious place, all gilt and white 
pamt-one of those hotels which have overcharging and bad service written on 
every brick Beside the drive, commanding the road, a snobbish board 
announced m gilt lettering 

THE RAVENSCROFT HOTEL 
OPEN TO NON-RESIDENTS 
LUNCHEONS-TEAS-DINNERS 
DANCE HALL AND TENNIS COURTS 
PARTIES CATERED FOR 

Two gleaming two-seater cars were parked in the drive Gordon quailed The 
money in his pocket seemed to shrink to nothing, this was the very opposite to 
the cosy pub they had been looking for But he was very hungry Rosemary 
tweaked at his arm 

‘It looks a beastly place I vote we go on ’ 

‘But we’ve got to get some food It’s our last chance We shan’t find another 
pub ’ 

‘The food’s always so disgusting in these places Beastly cold beef that tastes 
as if it had been saved up from last year And they charge you the earth for it ’ 

‘Oh, well, we’ll just order bread and cheese and beer It always costs about 
the same ’ 

‘But they hate you doing that They’ll try to bully us into having a proper 
lunch, you’ll see We must be firm and just say bread and cheese ’ 

‘All right, we’ll be firm Come on ’ 

They went in, resolved to be firm But there was an expensive smell m the 
draughty hallway-a smell of chintz, dead flowers, Thames water, and the 
rinsings of wine bottles It was the characteristic smell of a riverside hotel 
Gordon’s heart sank lower. He knew the type of place this was It was one of 
those desolate hotels which exist all along the motor roads and are frequented 
by stockbrokers airing their whores on Sunday afternoons In such places you 
are insulted and overcharged almost as a matter of course. Rosemary shrank 
nearer to him She too was mtumdated They saw a door marked ‘Saloon* and 
pushed it open, thinking it must be the bar. It was not a bar, however, but a 
large, smart, chilly room with corduroy-upholstered chairs and settees You 
could have mistaken it for an ordinary drawing-room except that all the 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 66 1 

ashtrays advertised White Horse whisky And round one of the tables the 
people from the cars outside-two blond, flat-headed, fattish men, over- 
youthfully dressed, and two disagreeable elegant young women- were sitting, 
having evidently just finished lunch A waiter, bending over their table, was 
serving them with liqueurs 

Gordon and Rosemary had halted m the doorway The people at the table 
were already eyeing them with offensive upper-middle-class eyes Gordon and 
Rosemary looked tired and dirty, and they knew it The notion of ordering 
bread and cheese and beer had almost vanished from their minds In such a 
place as this you couldn’t possibly say ‘Bread and cheese and beer’, ‘Lunch’ 
was the only thing you could say There was nothing for it but ‘Lunch’ or 
flight The waiter was almost openly contemptuous He had summed them up 
at a glance as having no money, but also he had divined that it was in their 
minds to fly and was determined to stop them before they could escape 

‘Sare'?’ he demanded, lifting his tray off the table 

Now for it' Say ‘Bread and cheese and beer’, and damn the consequences' 
Alas' his courage was gone ‘Lunch’ it would have to be With a seeming- 
careless gesture he thrust his hand into his pocket He was feeling his money to 
make sure that it was still there Seven and elevenpence left, he knew The 
waiter’s eye followed the movement, Gordon had a hateful feeling that the man 
could actually see through the cloth and count the money m his pocket In a 
tone as lordly as he could make it, he remarked 

‘Can we have some lunch, pleased’ 

‘Luncheon, sare? Yes, sare Zees way ’ 

The waiter was a black-haired young man with a very smooth, well- 
featured, sallow face His dress clothes were excellently cut and yet unclean- 
looking, as though he seldom took them off He looked like a Russian prince, 
probably he was an Englishman and had assumed a foreign accent because this 
was proper m a waiter. Defeated, Rosemary and Gordon followed him to the 
dining-room, which was at the back, giving on to the lawn It was exactly like 
an aquarium It was built entirely of greenish glass, and it was so damp and 
chilly that you could almost have fancied yourself under water You could both 
see and smell the river outside In the middle of each of the small round tables 
there was a bowl of paper flowers, but at one side, to complete the aquanum 
effect, there was a whole florist’s stand of evergreens, palms, and aspidistras 
and so forth, like dreary water-plants In summer such a room might be 
pleasant enough, at present, when the sun had gone behind a cloud, it was 
merely dank and miserable Rosemary was almost as much afraid of the waiter 
as Gordon was As they sat down and he turned away for a moment she made a 
face at his back 

‘I’m going to pay for my own lunch,’ she whispered to Gordon, across the 
table 

‘No, you’re not ’ 

‘What a horrible place' The food’s sure to be filthy I do wish we hadn’t 
come,’ 

‘Sh'’ 



66 2 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

The waiter had come back with a flyblown printed menu He handed it to 
Gordon and stood over him with the menacing air of a waiter who knows that 
you have not much money m your pocket Gordon’s heart pounded If it was a 
table d’hote lunch at three and sixpence or even half a crown., they were sunk 
He set his teeth and looked at the menu Thank God f It was k la carte The 
cheapest thing on the list was cold beef and salad for one and sixpence He said, 
or rather mumbled 

‘We’ll have some cold beef, please ’ 

The waiter’s delicate eyebrows lifted He feigned surprise 
‘ Only ze cold beef, sare?’ 

‘Yes that’ll do to go on with, anyway ’ 

‘But you will not have anysing else, sare^’ 

‘Oh, well Bring us some bread, of course And butter ’ 

‘But no soup to start wiz, sare’’ 

‘No No soup ’ 

‘Nor any fish, sare ? Only ze cold beeP’ 

‘Do we want any fish, Rosemary? I don’t think we do No No fish ’ 

‘Nor any sweet to follow, sare^ Only ze cold beeP’ 

Gordon had difficulty m controlling his features He thought he had never 
hated anyone so much as he hated this waiter 

‘We’ll tell you afterwards if we want anything else,’ he said 
‘And you will drink sare^’ 

Gordon had meant to ask for beer, but he hadn’t the courage now He had 
got to win back his prestige after this affair of the cold beef 
‘Bring me the wine list,’ he said flatly 

Another flyblown list was produced All the wines looked impossibly 
expensive However, at the very top of the list there was some nameless table 
claret at two and nine a bottle Gordon made hurried calculations He could 
just manage two and nine He indicated the wine with his thumbnail 
‘Bring us a bottle of this,’ he said 

The waiter’s eyebrows rose again He essayed a stroke of irony 

‘You will have ze whole bottle, sare^ You would not prefare ze half bottle^’ 

‘A whole bottle,’ said Gordon coldly. 

All in a single delicate movement of contempt the waiter inclined his head, 
shrugged his left shoulder, and turned away Gordon could not stand it He 
caught Rosemary’s eye across the table. Somehow or other they had got to put 
that waiter in his place! In a moment the waiter came back, carrying the bottle 
of cheap wine by the neck, and half concealing it behind his coat tails, as 
though it were something a little indecent or unclean Gordon had thought of a 
way to avenge himself As the waiter displayed the bottle he put out a hand, felt 
it, and frowned, 

‘That’s not the way to serve red wine,’ he said, 

|ust for a moment the waiter was taken aback. ‘Sare^’ he said 
‘It’s stone cold. Take the bottle away and warm it ’ 

‘ Very good, sare.’ 

But it was not really a victory. The waiter did not look abashed. Was the 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 66 3 

wine worth warming? his raised eyebrow said He bore the bottle away with 
easy disdain, making it quite clear to Rosemary and Gordon that it was bad 
enough to order the cheapest wine on the list without making this fuss about it 
afterwards 

The beef and salad were corpse-cold and did not seem like real food at all 
They tasted like water The rolls, also, though stale, were damp The reedy 
Thames water seemed to have got into everything It was no surprise that 
when the wine was opened it tasted like mud But it was alcoholic, that was the 
great thing It was quite a surprise to find how stimulating it was, once you had 
got it past your gullet and into your stomach After drinking a glass and a half 
Gordon felt very much better The waiter stood by the door, ironically patient, 
his napkin over his arm, trying to make Gordon and Rosemary uncomfortable 
by his presence At first he succeeded, but Gordon’s back was towards him, 
and he disregarded him and presently almost forgot him By degrees their 
courage returned They began to talk more easily and m louder voices 
‘Look,’ said Gordon ‘Those swans have followed us all the way up here ’ 
Sure enough, there were the two swans sailing vaguely to and fro over the 
dark green water And at this moment the sun burst out again and the dreary 
aquarium of a dining-room was flooded with pleasant greemsh light Gordon 
and Rosemary felt suddenly warm and happy They began chattering about 
nothing, almost as though the waiter had not been there, and Gordon took up 
the bottle and poured out two more glasses of wine Over their glasses their 
eyes met She was looking at him with a sort of yielding irony ‘I’m your 
mistress,’ her eyes said, ‘what a joke 1 ’ Their knees were touching under the 
small table, momentarily she squeezed his knee between her own Something 
leapt inside him, a warm wave of sensuality and tenderness crept up his body 
He had remembered 1 She was his girl, his mistress Presently, when they were 
alone, in some hidden place in the warm, windless air, he would have her naked 
body all for his own at last. True, all the morning he had known this, but 
somehow the knowledge had been unreal It was only now that he grasped it 
Without words said, with a sort of bodily certainty, he knew that withm an 
hour she would be m his arms, naked As they sat there m the warm light, then 
knees touching, their eyes meeting, they felt as though already everything had 
been accomplished There was deep intimacy between them They could have 
sat there for hours, just looking at one another and talking of trivial things that 
had meanings for them and for nobody else They did sit there for twenty 
minutes or more Gordon had forgotten the waiter-had even forgotten, 
momentarily, the disaster of being let m for this wretched lunch that was going 
to strip him of every penny he had But presently the sun went in, the room 
grew grey again, and they realized that it was time to go 
‘The bill,’ said Gordon, turning half round 
The waiter made a final effort to be offensive 
‘Ze bill, sare? But you do not wish any coffee, sare?’ 

‘No, no coffee. The bill ’ 

The waiter retired and came back with a folded slip on a salver Gordon 
opened it Six and threepence-and he had exactly seven and elevenpence in 



664 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

the world’ Of course he had known approximately what the bill must be, and 
yet it was a shock now that it came He stood up, felt m his pocket, and took out 
all his money The sallow young waiter, his salver on his arm, eyed the handful 
of money, plainly he divined that it was all Gordon had Rosemary also had got 
up and come round the table She pinched Gordon’s elbow, this was a signal 
that she would like to pay her share Gordon pretended not to notice He paid 
the six and threepence, and, as he turned away, dropped another shilling on to 
the salver The waiter balanced it for a moment on his hand, flicked it over, and 
then slipped it into his waistcoat pocket with the air of covering up something 
unmentionable 

As they went down the passage, Gordon felt dismayed, helpless- dazed, 
almost All his money gone at a single swoop 1 It was a ghastly thing to happen 
If only they had not come to this accursed place 1 The whole day was ruined 
now-and all for the sake of a couple of plates of cold beef and a bottle of muddy 
wine 1 Presently there would be tea to think about, and he had only six 
cigarettes left, and there were the bus fares back to Slough and God knew what 
else, and he had just eightpence to pay for the lot’ They got outside the hotel 
feeling as if they had been kicked out and the door slammed behind them All 
the warm intimacy of a moment ago was gone Everything seemed different 
now that they were outside Their blood seemed to grow suddenly cooler m the 
open air Rosemary walked ahead of him, rather nervous, not speaking She 
was half frightened now by the thing she had resolved to do He watched her 
strong delicate limbs moving There was her body that he had wanted so long, 
but now when the time had come it only daunted him He wanted her to be his, 
he wanted to have had her, but he wished it were over and done with It was an 
effort-a thing he had got to screw himself up to It was strange that that beastly 
business of the hotel bill could have upset him so completely The easy 
carefree mood of the mormng was shattered, m its place there had come back 
the hateful, harassing, familiar thing- worry about money In a minute he 
would have to own up that he had only eightpence left, he would have to 
borrow money off her to get them home, it would be squalid and shameful 
Only the wine inside him kept up his courage The warmth of the wine, and the 
hateful feeling of having only eightpence left, warred together m his body, 
neither getting the better of the other 

They walked rather slowly, but soon they were away from the river and on 
higher ground again. Each searched desperately for something to say and 
could think of nothing He came level with her, took her hand, and wound her 
fingers within his own Like that they felt better But his heart beat painfully, 
his entrails were constricted He wondered whether she felt the same 

‘There doesn’t seem to be a soul about,’ she said at last. 

‘It’s Sunday afternoon They’re all asleep under the aspidistra, after roast 
beef and Yorkshire,’ 

There was another silence They walked on fifty yards or so With difficulty 
mastering his voice, he managed to say* 

Tt’s extraordinarily warm. We might sit down for a bit if we can find a 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 66 5 

‘Yes, all right If you like * 

Presently they came to a small copse on the left of the road It looked dead 
and empty, nothing growing under the naked trees But at the corner of the 
copse, on the far side, there was a great tangled patch of sloe or blackthorn 
bushes He put his arm round her without saying anything and turned her m 
that direction There was a gap m the hedge with some barbed wire strung 
across it He held the wire up for her and she slipped mmbly under it His heart 
leapt again How supple and strong she was 1 But as he climbed over the wire to 
follow her, the eightpence-a sixpence and two penmes-clinked in his pocket, 
daunting him anew 

When they got to the bushes they found a natural alcove On three sides 
were beds of thorns, leafless but impenetrable, and on the other side you 
looked downhill over a sweep of naked ploughed fields At the bottom of the 
hill stood a low-roofed cottage, tiny as a child’s toy, its chimneys smokeless 
Not a creature was stirring anywhere You could not have been more alone 
than in such a place The grass was the fine mossy stuff that grows under trees 

‘We ought to have brought a mackintosh,’ he said He had knelt down 

‘It doesn’t matter The ground’s fairly dry ’ 

He pulled her to the ground beside him, kissed her, pulled off the flat felt 
hat, lay upon her breast to breast, kissed her face all over She lay under him, 
yielding rather than responding She did not resist when his hand sought her 
breasts But m her heart she was still frightened She would do lt-oh, yes' she 
would keep her implied promise, she would not draw back, but all the same she 
was frightened And at heart he too was half reluctant It dismayed him to find 
how little, at this moment, he really wanted her The money-business still 
unnerved him How can you make love when you have only eightpence in your 
pocket and are thinking about it all the time^ Yet m a way he wanted her 
Indeed, he could not do without her His life would be a different thing when 
once they were really lovers For a long time he lay on her breast, her head 
turned sideways, his face against her neck and hair, attempting nothing 
further 

Then the sun came out agam. It was getting low m the sky now The warm 
light poured over them as though a membrane across the sky had broken. It 
had been a little cold on the grass, really, with the sun behind the clouds, but 
now once again it was almost as warm as summer Both of them sat up to 
exclaim at it 

‘Oh, Gordon, look' Look how the sun’s lighting everything up ! ’ 

As the clouds melted away a widening yellow beam slid swiftly across the 
valley, gilding everything m its path Grass that had been dull green shone 
suddenly emerald. The empty cottage below sprang out into warm colours, 
purply-blue of tiles, cherry-red of brick. Only the fact that no birds were 
singing reminded you that it was winter Gordon put his arm round Rosemary 
and pulled her hard against him. They sat cheek to cheek, looking down the 
hill He turned her round and kissed her. 

‘You do like me, don’t you?’ 

‘Adore you, silly/ 



666 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

‘And you’re going to be nice to me, aren’t you?’ 

‘Nice to you?’ 

‘Let me do what I want with you?’ 

‘Yes, I expect so ’ 

‘Anything?’ 

‘Yes, all right Anything ’ 

He pressed her back upon the grass It was quite different now The warmth 
of the sun seemed to have got into their bones ‘Take your clothes off, there’s a 
dear,’ he whispered She did it readily enough She had no shame before him 
Besides, it was so warm and the place was so solitary that it did not matter how 
many clothes you took off They spread her clothes out and made a sort of bed 
for her to lie on Naked, she lay back, her hands behind her head, her eyes shut, 
smiling slightly, as though she had considered everything and were at peace in 
her mind For a long time he knelt and gazed at her body Its beauty startled 
him She looked much younger naked than with her clothes on Her face, 
thrown back, with eyes shut, looked almost childish He moved closer to her 
Once again the coins clinked m his pocket Only eightpence left* Trouble 
coming presently But he wouldn’t think of it now Get on with it, that’s the 
great thing, get on with it and damn the future 1 He put an arm beneath her and 
laid his body to hers 
‘May I? -now? 5 
‘Yes All right ’ 

‘You’re not frightened?’ 

‘No’ 

‘I’ll be as gentle as I can with you ’ 

‘It doesn’t matter ’ 

A moment later 

‘Oh, Gordon, no 1 No, no, no 1 ’ 

‘What? What is it?’ 

‘No, Gordon, no 1 You mustn’t 1 Na p 

She put her hands against him and pushed him violently back Her face 
looked remote, frightened, almost hostile. It was terrible to feel her push him 
away at such a moment It was as though cold water had been dashed all over 
him He fell back from her, dismayed, hurriedly rearranging his clothes 
‘What is it? What’s the matter?’ 

‘Oh, Gordon' I thought you-oh, dear 1 ’ 

She threw her arm over her face and rolled over on her side, away from him, 
suddenly ashamed 
‘What is it?’ he repeated 
‘How could you be so thoughtless ?’ 

‘What do you mean-thoughtless?’ 
f Oh! y on know what I mean!’ 

His heart shrank He did know what she meant, but he had never thought of 
it tin this moment. And of course-oh, yes' -he ought to have thought of it He 
stood up and tinned away from her Suddenly he knew that he could go no 
further with this business- In a wet field on a Sunday afternoon-and m mid- 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 66j 

winter at that 1 Impossible 1 It seemed so right, so natural only a minute ago, 
now it seemed merely squalid and ugly 
‘I didn’t expect this,’ he said bitterly 

‘But I couldn’t help it, Gordon 1 You ought to have-you know ’ 

‘You don’t think I go m for that kind of thing, do you?’ 

‘But what else can we do? I can’t have a baby, can P’ 

‘You must take your chance ’ 

‘Oh, Gordon, how impossible you are 1 ’ 

She lay looking up at him, her face full of distress, too overcome for the 
moment even to remember that she was naked His disappointment had turned 
to anger There you are, you see 1 Money again 1 Even the most secret action of 
your life you don’t escape it, you’ve still got to spoil everything with filthy 
cold-blooded precautions for money’s sake Money, money, always money 1 
Even m the bridal bed, the finger of the money-god intruding' In the heights 
or m the depths, he is there He walked a pace or two up and down, his hands m 
his pockets 

‘Money again, you see'’ he said. ‘Even at a moment like this it’s got the 
power to stand over us and bully us Even when we’re alone and miles from 
anywhere, with not a soul to see us ’ 

‘What’s money got to do with it?’ 

‘I tell you it’d never enter your head to worry about a baby if it wasn’t for the 
money You’d want the baby if it wasn’t for that You say you “can’t” have a 
baby What do you mean, you “can’t” have a baby? You mean you daren’t, 
because you’d lose your job and I’ve got no money and all of us would starve 
This birth-control business' It’s just another way they’ve found out of 
bullying us And you want to acquiesce in it, apparently ’ 

‘But what am I to do, Gordon? What am I to do?’ 

At this moment the sun disappeared behmd the clouds It became 
perceptibly colder After all, the scene was grotesque-the naked woman lying 
m the grass, the dressed man standing moodily by with his hands m his 
pockets She’d catch her death of cold in another moment, lying there like that, 
The whole thing was absurd and indecent 
‘But what else am I to do?’ she repeated. 

‘I should think you might start by putting your clothes on,’ he said coldly 
He had only said it to avenge his irritation, but its result was to make her so 
painfully and obviously embarrassed that he had to turn his back on her, She 
had dressed herself in a very few moments. As she knelt lacing up her shoes he 
heard her sniff once or twice. She was on the point of crying and was struggling 
to restrain herself He felt horribly ashamed He would have liked to throw 
himself on his knees beside her, put his arms round her, and ask her pardon 
But he could do nothing of the kind, the scene had left him lumpish and 
awkward. It was with difficulty that he could command his voice even for the 
most banal remark, 

‘Are you ready?’ he said flatly 
‘Yes,’ 

They went back to the road, climbed through the wire, and started down the 



668 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

hill without another word Fresh clouds were rolling across the sun It was 
getting much colder Another hour and the early dusk would have fallen They 
reached the bottom of the hill and came in sight of the Ravenscroft Hotel, 
scene of their disaster 

‘Where are we going?’ said Rosemary in a small sulky voice 
‘Back to Slough, I suppose We must cross the bridge and have a look at the 
signposts ’ 

They scarcely spoke again till they had gone several miles Rosemary was 
embarrassed and miserable A number of tunes she edged closer to him, 
meaning to take his arm, but he edged away from her, and so they walked 
abreast with almost the width of the road between them She imagined that she 
had offended him mortally She supposed that it was because of his 
disappomtment-because she had pushed him away at the critical 
moment-that he was angry with her, she would have apologized if he had 
given her a quarter of a chance But as a matter of fact he was scarcely thinking 
of this any longer His mind had turned away from that side of things It was 
the money-business that was troubling him now-the fact that he had only 
eightpence in his pocket In a very little while he would have to confess it 
There would be the bus fares from Farnham to Slough, and tea m Slough, and 
cigarettes, and more bus fares and perhaps another meal when they got back to 
London, and just eightpence to cover the lot* He would have to borrow from 
Rosemary after all And that was so damned humiliating It is hateful to have 
to borrow money off someone you have just been quarrelling with What 
nonsense it made of all his fine attitudes 1 There was he, lecturing her, putting 
on superior airs, pretending to be shocked because she took contraception for 
granted, and the next moment turning round and asking her for money* But 
there you are, you see, that’s what money can do There is no attitude that 
money or the lack of it cannot puncture 
By half past four it was almost completely dark They tramped along misty 
roads where there was no illumination save the cracks of cottage windows and 
the yellow beam of an occasional car It was getting beastly cold, too, but they 
had walked four miles and the exercise had warmed them It was impossible to 
go on being unsociable any longer They began to talk more easily and by 
degrees they edged closer together Rosemary took Gordon’s arm. Presently 
she stopped him and swung him round to face her 
‘Gordon, why are you so beastly to me?’ 

‘How am I beastly to you?’ 

‘Coming all this way without speaking a word*’ 

‘Oh, well*’ 

‘Are you still angry with me because of what happened just now?’ 

‘No. I was never angry with you You're not to blame ’ 

She looked up at him, trying to divine the expression of his face m the almost 
pitch darkness He drew her against him, and, as she seemed to expect it, tilted 
her face back and kissed her She clung to him eagerly, her body melted against 
his. $he had been waiting for this, it seemed. 

‘Gordon, you do love me, don’t you?’ 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 


669 


‘Of course I do ’ 

‘Things went wrong somehow I couldn’t help it I got frightened 
suddenly 5 

‘It doesn’t matter Another time it’ll be all right ’ 

She was lying limp against him, her head on his breast He could feel her 
heart beating It seemed to flutter violently, as though she were taking some 
decision 

‘I don’t care,’ she said indistinctly, her face buried in his coat 
‘Don’t care about what?’ 

‘The baby I’ll risk it You can do what you like with me ’ 

At these surrendering words a weak desire raised itself m him and died away 
at once He knew why she had said it It was not because, at this moment, she 
really wanted to be made love to It was from a mere generous impulse to let 
him know that she loved him and would take a dreaded risk rather than 
disappoint him 
‘Now?’ he said 
‘Yes, if you like ’ 

He considered He so wanted to be sure that she was his 1 But the cold night 
air flowed over them Behind the hedges the long grass would be wet and chill 
This was not the time or the place Besides, that business of the eightpence had 
usurped his mind He was not in the mood any longer 
‘I can’t,’ he said finally 
‘You can’t' But, Gordon' I thought-’ 

‘I know But it’s all different now ’ 

‘You’re still upset?’ 

‘Yes In a way ’ 

‘Why?’ 

He pushed her a little away from him As well have the explanation now as 
later Nevertheless he was so ashamed that he mumbled rather than said 
‘I’ve got a beastly thing to say to you It’s been worrying me all the way 
along ’ 

‘What is it?’ 

‘It’s this Can you lend me some money? I’m absolutely cleaned out, I had 
just enough money for today, but that beastly hotel bill upset everything I’ve 
only eightpence left ’ 

Rosemary was amazed She broke right out of his arms in her amazement 
‘Only eightpence left' What are you talking about? What does it matter if 
you’ve only eightpence left?’ 

‘Don’t I tell you I shall have to borrow money off you in another minute? 
You’ll have to pay for your own bus fares, and my bus fares, and your tea and 
Lord knows what. And I asked you to come out with me' You’re supposed to 
be my guest It’s bloody.’ 

‘Your guest' Oh, Gordon Is that what’s been worrying you all this time?’ 
‘Yes’ 

‘Gordon, you are a babyl How can you let yourself be warned by a thing like 
that? As though I minded lending you money 1 Aren’t I always telling you I 



6 jo Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

want to pay my share when we go out together 5 ’ 

‘Yes, and you know how I hate your paying We had that out the other 
night ’ 

‘Oh, how absurd, how absurd you are' Do you think there’s anything to be 
ashamed of in having no money 5 ’ 

‘Of course there is 1 It’s the only thing in the world there is to be ashamed of ’ 
‘But what’s it got to do with you and me making love, anyway 5 I don’t 
understand you First you want to and then you don’t want to What’s money 
got to do with it 5 ’ 

‘Everything ’ 

He wound her arm in his and started down the road She would never 
understand Nevertheless he had got to explain 

‘Don’t you understand that one isn’t a full human bemg-that one doesn’t 
feel a human being-unless one’s got money m one’s pocket 5 ’ 

‘No I think that’s just silly ’ 

‘It isn’t that I don’t want to make love to you I do But I tell you I can’t 
make love to you when I’ve only eightpence m my pocket At least when you 
know I’ve only eightpence I just can’t do it It’s physically impossible ’ 

‘But why 5 Why 5 ’ 

‘You’ll find it in LempnCre,’ he said obscurely 

That settled it They talked no more about it For the second time he had 
behaved grossly badly and yet he had made her feel as if it were she who was in 
the wrong They walked on She did not understand him, on the other hand, 
she forgave him everything Presently they reached Farnham Common, and, 
after a wait at the cross road, got a bus to Slough In the darkness, as the bus 
loomed near, Rosemary found Gordon’s hand and slipped half a crown into it, 
so that he might pay the fares and not be shamed in public by lettmg a woman 
pay for him 

For his own part Gordon would sooner have walked to Slough and saved the 
bus fares, but he knew Rosemary would refuse In Slough, also, he was for 
taking the tram straight back to London, but Rosemary said indignantly that 
she wasn’t going to go without her tea, so they went to a large, dreary, draughty 
hotel near the station Tea, with little wilting sandwiches and rock cakes like 
balls of putty, was two shillings a head. It was torment to Gordon to let her pay 
for his food He sulked, ate nothing, and, after a whispered argument, insisted 
on contributing his eightpence towards the cost of the tea 
It was seven o’clock when they took the train back to London The tram was 
full of tired hikers m khaki shorts. Rosemary and Gordon did not talk much 
They sat close together, Rosemary with her arm twined through his, playing 
with his hand, Gordon looking out of the window People m the carriage eyed 
them, wondering what they had quarrelled about. Gordon watched the lamp- 
starred darkness streaming past So the day to which he had looked forward 
was ended. And now back to Willowbed Road, with a penniless week ahead 
For a whole week, unless some miracle happened, he wouldn’t even be able to 
buy himself a cigarette What a bloody fool he had been! Rosemary was not 
with him By the pressure of her hand she tried to make it clear to him 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 671 

that she loved him His pale discontented face, turned half away from her, his 
shabby coat, and his unkempt mouse-coloured hair that wanted cutting more 
than ever, filled her with profound pity She felt more tenderly towards him 
than she would have done if everything had gone well, because in her femimne 
way she grasped that he was unhappy and that life was difficult for him 
‘See me home, will you’’ she said as they got out at Paddington 
‘If you don’t mind walking I haven’t got the fare ’ 

‘But let me pay the fare Oh, dear' I suppose you won’t But how are you 
going to get home yourselP’ 

‘Oh, I’ll walk I know the way It’s not very far ’ 

‘I hate to think of you walking all that way You look so tired Be a dear and 
let me pay your fare home Do 1 ’ 

‘No You’ve paid quite enough for me already ’ 

‘Oh, dear 1 You are so silly 1 ’ 

They halted at the entrance to the Underground He took her hand ‘I 
suppose we must say good-bye for the present,’ he said 

‘Good-bye, Gordon dear Thanks ever so much for taking me out It was 
such fun this morning ’ 

‘Ah, this morning' It was different then ’ His mind went back to the 
morning hours, when they had been alone on the road together and there was 
still money m his pocket Compunction seized him On the whole he had 
behaved badly He pressed her hand a little tighter ‘You’re not angry with me, 
are you’’ 

‘No, silly, of course not ’ 

‘I didn’t mean to be beastly to you It was the money It’s always the money ’ 
‘Never mind, it’ll be better next time We’ll go to some better place We’ll go 
down to Brighton for the week-end, or something.’ 

‘Perhaps, when I’ve got the money You will write soon, won’t you’’ 

‘Yes ’ 

‘Your letters are the only things that keep me going Tell me when you’ll 
write, so that I can have your letter to look forward to ’ 

‘I’ll write tomorrow mght and post it on Tuesday Then you’ll get it last post 
on Tuesday night ’ 

‘Then good-bye, Rosemary dear ’ 

‘Good-bye, Gordon darling ’ 

He left her at the booking-office When he had gone twenty yards he felt a 
hand laid on his arm He turned sharply It was Rosemary She thrust a packet 
of twenty Gold Flake, which she had bought at the tobacco kiosk, into his coat 
pocket and ran back to the Underground before he could protest 
He trailed homeward through the wastes of Marylebone and Regent’s Park 
It was the fag-end of the day The streets were dark and desolate, with that 
strange listless feeling of Sunday night when people are more tired after a day 
of idleness than after a day of work. It was vilely cold, too The wind had risen 
when the mght felt Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over Gordon was 
footsore, having walked a dozen or fifteen miles, and also hungry. He had had 
little food all day In the morning he had hurried off without a proper 



6 j 2 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

breakfast, and the lunch at the Ravenscroft Hotel wasn’t the kind of meal that 
did you much good, since then he had had no solid food However, there was 
no hope of getting anything when he got home He had told Mother Wisbeach 
that he would be away all day 

When he reached the Hampstead Road he had to wait on the kerb to let a 
stream of cars go past Even here everything seemed dark and gloomy, m spite 
of the glaring lamps and the cold glitter of the jewellers’ windows The raw 
wind pierced his thin clothes, making him shiver Sharply the menacing wind 
sweeps over The bending poplars , newly bare He had finished that poem, all 
except the last two lines He thought again of those hours this mornmg-the 
empty misty roads, the feeling of freedom and adventure, of having the whole 
day and the whole country before you m which to wander at will It was having 
money that did it, of course Seven and elevenpence he had had m his pocket 
this morning It had been a brief victory over the money-god, a morning’s 
apostasy, a holiday m the groves of Ashtaroth But such things never last Your 
money goes and your freedom with it Circumcise ye your foreskins, saith the 
Lord And back we creep, duly snivelling 

Another shoal of cars swam past One m particular caught his eye, a long 
slender thmg, elegant as a swallow, all gleaming blue and silver, a thousand 
guineas it would have cost, he thought A blue-clad chauffeur sat at the wheel, 
upright, immobile, like some scornful statue At the back, in the pmk-lit 
interior, four elegant young people, two youths, and two girls, were smoking 
cigarettes and laughing He had a glimpse of sleek bunny-faces, faces of 
ravishing pinkness and smoothness, lit by that peculiar inner glow that can 
never be counterfeited, the soft warm radiance of money 

He crossed the road No food tonight However, there was still oil in the 
lamp, thank God, he would have a secret cup of tea when he got back At this 
moment he saw himself and his life without savmg disguises. Every night the 
same-back to the cold lonely bedroom and the grimy littered sheets of the 
poem that never got any further. It was a blind alley. He would never finish 
London Pleasures , he would never marry Rosemary, he would never set his life 
m order He would only drift and sink, drift and sink, like the others of his 
family, but worse than them-down, down into some dreadful sub-world that 
as yet he could only dimly imagine It was what he had chosen when he 
declared war on money Serve the money-god or go under, there is no other 
rule 

Something deep below made the stone street shiver The tube-train, sliding 
through middle earth. He had a vision of London, of the western world, he saw 
a thousand million slaves toiling and grovelling about the throne of money 
The earth is ploughed, ships sail, miners sweat in dripping tunnels 
underground, clerks hurry for the eight-fifteen with the fear of the boss eating 
at their vitals. And even in bed with their wives they tremble and obey. Obey 
whom? The money-priesthood, the pink-faced masters of the world. The 
Upper Crust A welter of sleek young rabbits m thousand guinea motor cars, of 
golfing stockbrokers and cosmopolitan financiers, of Chancery lawyers and 
fashionable Nancy boys, of bankers, newspaper peers, novelists of all four 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 6 73 

sexes, American pugilists, lady aviators, film stars, bishops, titled poets, and 
Chicago gorillas 

When he had gone another fifty yards the rhyme for the final stanza of his 
poem occurred to him He walked homeward, repeating the poem to himself 

Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over 
The bending poplars, newly bare, 

And the dark ribbons of the chimneys 
Veer downward, flicked by whips of air. 

Torn posters flutter, coldly sound 

The boom of trams and the rattle of hooves, 

And the clerks who hurry to the station 
Look, shuddering, over the eastern rooves, 

Thinking, each one, ‘Here comes the winteri 
Please God I keep my job this year 1 ’ 

And bleakly, as the cold strikes through 
Their entrails like an icy spear, 

They think of rent, rates, season tickets, 

Insurance, coal, the skivvy’s wages, 

Boots, school-bills, and the next instalment 
Upon the two twin beds from Drage’s 

For if m careless summer days 
In groves of Ashtaroth we whored, 

Repentant now, when winds blow cold, 

We kneel before our rightful lord, 

The lord of all, the money-god, 

Who rules us blood and hand and brain. 

Who gives the roof that stops the wind, 

And, giving, takes away again, 

Who spies with jealous, watchful care. 

Our thoughts, our dreams, our secret ways, 

Who picks our words and cuts our clothes. 

And maps the pattern of our days, 

Who chills our anger, curbs our hope, 

And buys our lives and pays with toys, 

Who claims as tribute broken faith, 

Accepted insults, muted joys, 

Who binds with chains the poet’s wit, 

The navvy’s strength, the soldier’s pnde. 

And lays the sleek, estranging shield 
Between the lover and his bride 



8 


As the clock struck one Gordon slammed the shop door to and hurried, almost 
ran, to the branch of the Westminster Bank down the street 
With a half-conscious gesture of caution he was clutching the lapel of his 
coat, holding it tight against him In there, stowed away in his right-hand inner 
pocket, was an object whose very existence he partly doubted It was a stout 
blue envelope with an American stamp, m the envelope was a cheque for fifty 
dollars, and the cheque was made out to ‘Gordon Comstock’ 1 
He could feel the square shape of the envelope outlined against his body as 
clearly as though it had been red hot All the morning he had felt it there, 
whether he touched it or whether he did not, he seemed to have developed a 
special patch of sensitiveness in the skin below his right breast As often as 
once in ten minutes he had taken the cheque out of its envelope and anxiously 
examined it After all, cheques are tricky things It would be frightful if there 
turned out to be some hitch about the date or the signature Besides, he might 
lose it— -it might even vanish of its own accord like fairy gold 
The cheque had come from the Californian Review , that American magazine 
to which, weeks or months ago, he had despairingly sent a poem He had 
almost forgotten about the poem, it had been so long away, until this morning 
their letter had come sailing out of the blue And what a letter 1 No English 
editor ever writes letters like that They were ‘very favorably impressed’ by his 
poem They would ‘endeavor’ to include it m their next number Would he 
‘favor’ them by showing them some more of his work? (Would he? Oh, boy 1 -as 
Flaxman would say ) And the cheque had come with it It seemed the most 
monstrous folly, m this year of blight 1934, that anyone should pay fifty dollars 
for a poem However, there it was, and there was the cheque, which looked 
perfectly genuine however often he inspected it 
He would have no peace of mind till the cheque was cashed-for quite 
possibly the bank would refuse it-but already a stream of visions was flowing 
through his mind Visions of girls’ faces, visions of cobwebby claret bottles 
and quart pots of beer, visions of a new suit and his overcoat out of pawn, 
visions of a week-end at Brighton with Rosemary, visions of the crisp, 
cracMing five pound note which he was going to give to Julia, Above all, of 
course, that flyer for Julia, It was almost the first thing he had thought of when 
the cheque came Whatever else he did with the money, he must give Julia half 
of it. It was only the barest justice, considering how much he had ‘borrowed’ 
from her in all these years All the morning the thought of Julia and the money 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 675 

he owed her had been cropping up in his mind at odd moments It was a 
vaguely distasteful thought, however He would forget about it for half an hour 
at a time, would plan a dozen ways of spending his ten pounds to the uttermost 
farthing, and then suddenly he would remember about Julia Good old Julia' 
Julia should have her share A fiver at the very least Even that was not a tenth 
of what he owed her For the twentieth time, with a faint malaise, he registered 
the thought five quid for Julia 

The bank made no trouble about the cheque Gordon had no banking 
account, but they knew him well, for Mr McKechme banked there They had 
cashed editors’ cheques for Gordon before There was only a minute’s 
consultation, and then the cashier came back 
‘Notes, Mr Comstock 5 ’ 

‘One five pound, and the rest pounds, please ’ 

The flimsy luscious fiver and the five clean pound notes slid rustling under 
the brass rail And after them the cashier pushed a little pile of half-crowns and 
pennies In lordly style Gordon shot the coins into his pocket without even 
counting them That was a bit of backsheesh He had only expected ten pounds 
for fifty dollars The dollar must be above par The five pound note, however, 
he carefully folded up and stowed away m the American envelope That was 
Julia’s fiver It was sacrosanct He would post it to her presently 
He did not go home for dinner Why chew leathery beef m the aspidistral 
dining-room when he had ten quid in pocket-five quid, rather 5 (He kept 
forgetting that half the money was already mortgaged to Julia) For the 
moment he did not bother to post Julia’s five pounds This evening would be 
soon enough Besides, he rather enjoyed the feeling of it m his pocket It was 
queer how different you felt with all that money m your pocket Not opulent, 
merely, but reassured, revivified, reborn He felt a different person from what 
he had been yesterday He was a different person He was no longer the 
downtrodden wretch who made secret cups of tea over the oil stove at 31 
Willowbed Road He was Gordon Comstock, the poet, famous on both sides of 
the Atlantic Publications Mice (1932), London Pleasures (1935) He thought 
with perfect confidence of London Pleasures now In three months it should see 
the light Demy octavo, white buckram covers There was nothing that he did 
not feel equal to now that his luck had turned 
He strolled into the Prince of Wales for a bite of food A cut off the joint and 
two veg , one and twopence, a pint of pale ale mnepence, twenty Gold Flakes a 
shilling. Even after that extravagance he still had well over ten pounds m 
hand-or rather, well over five pounds Beer-warmed, he sat and meditated on 
the things you can do with five pounds A new suit, a week-end m the country, 
a day-trip to Pans, five rousing drunks, ten dinners m Soho restaurants At 
this point it occurred to him that he and Rosemary and Ravelston must 
certainly have dinner together tonight Just to celebrate his stroke of luck; after 
all, it isn’t every day that ten pounds-five pounds-drops out of the sky into 
your lap. The thought of the three of them together, with good food and wine 
and money no object took hold of him as something not to be resisted. He had 
just a tiny twinge of caution. Mustn’t spend 4# his money, of course Still, he 



6 7 S Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

could afford a quid-two quid In a couple of minutes he had got Ravelston on 
the pub phone 

‘Is that you, Ravelston’ I say, Ravelston' Look here, you’ve got to have 
dinner with me tomght ’ 

From the other end of the line Ravelston faintly demurred ‘No, dash it 1 You 
have dinner with me * But Gordon overbore him Nonsense 1 Ravelston had got 
to have dinner with him tonight Unwillingly, Ravelston assented All right, 
yes, thanks, he’d like it very much There was a sort of apologetic misery m his 
voice He guessed what had happened Gordon had got hold of money from 
somewhere and was squandering it immediately, as usual, Ravelston felt he 
hadn’t the right to interfere Where should they go’ Gordon was demanding 
Ravelston began to speak m praise of those jolly little Soho restaurants where 
you get such a wonderful dinner for half a crown But the Soho restaurants 
sounded beastly as soon as Ravelston mentioned them Gordon wouldn’t hear 
of it Nonsense 1 They must go somewhere decent Let’s do it all regardless, 
was his private thought, might as well spend two quid-three quid, even 
Where did Ravelston generally go’ Modigliani’s, admitted Ravelston But 
Modigliani’s was very-but no 1 not even over the phone could Ravelston frame 
that hateful word ‘expensive’ How remind Gordon of his poverty’ Gordon 
mightn’t care for Modigliani’s, he euphemistically said But Gordon was 
satisfied Modigliani’s’ Right you are-half past eight Good' After all, if he 
spent even three quid on the dinner he’d still have two quid to buy himself a 
new pair of shoes and a vest and a 'pair of pants 

He had fixed it up with Rosemary in another five minutes The New Albion 
did not like their employees being rung up on the phone, but it did not matter 
once in a way Since that disastrous Sunday journey, five days ago, he had 
heard from her once but had not seen her She answered eagerly when she 
heard whose voice it was Would she have dinner with him tonight’ Of course' 
What fun 1 And so in ten minutes the whole thing was settled He had always 
wanted Rosemary and Ravelston to meet, but somehow had never been able to 
contrive it These things are so much easier when you’ve got a little money to 
spend 

The taxi bore him westward through the darkling streets A three-mile 
journey-still, he could afford it Why spoil the ship for a ha’porth of tar’ He 
had dropped that notion of spending only two pounds tonight He would 
spend three pounds, three pounds ten-four pounds if he felt like it Slap up 
and regardless-that was the idea. And, oh' by the way' Julia’s fiver He hadn’t 
sent it yet No matter Send it first thing in the morning. Good old Julia' She 
should have her fiver. 

How voluptuous were the taxi cushions under his bum' He lolled this way 
and that. He had been drinking, of course-had had two quick ones, or possibly 
three, before coming away. The taxi-driver was a stout philosophic man with a 
wealherbeatea face and a knowing eye He and Gordon understood one 
{mother, They had palled up m the bar where Gordon was having his quick 
ones. As they neared the West End the taximan drew up, unbidden, at a 
discreet pub on a corner. He knew what was in Gordon’s mind. Gordon could 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 6j*j 

do with a quick one So could the taximan But the drinks were on 
Gordon-that too was understood 
‘You anticipated my thoughts/ said Gordon, climbing out 
‘Yes, sir ’ 

‘I could just about do with a quick one 5 
‘Thought you might, sir * 

‘And could you manage one yourself, do you think’’ 

‘Where there’s a will there’s a way,’ said the taximan 
‘Come inside,’ said Gordon 

They leaned matily on the brass-edged bar, elbow to elbow, lighting two of 
the taximan’s cigarettes Gordon felt witty and expansive He would have liked 
to tell the taximan the history of his life The white-aproned barman hastened 
towards them 

‘Yes sir’’ said the barman 

‘Gin,’ said Gordon 

‘Make it two,’ said the taximan 

More matily than ever, they clinked glasses 

‘Many happy returns,’ said Gordon 

‘Your birthday today, sir’’ 

‘Only metaphorically My re-birthday, so to speak ’ 

‘I never had much education,’ said the taximan 
‘I was speaking in parables,’ said Gordon 
‘English is good enough for me,’ said the taximan 
‘It was the tongue of Shakespeare,’ said Gordon 
‘Literary gentleman, are you, sir, by any chance’’ 

‘Do I look as moth-eaten as all that’’ 

‘Not moth-eaten, sir Only intellectual-like ’ 

‘You’re quite right A poet ’ 

‘Poet* It takes all sorts to make a world, don’t it now’’ said the taximan 
‘And a bloody good world it is,’ said Gordon 

His thoughts moved lyrically tonight They had another gm and presently 
went back to the taxi all but arm in arm, after yet another gm That made five 
gins Gordon had had this evening There was an ethereal feeling m his veins; 
the gm seemed to be flowing there, mingled with his blood He lay back m the 
corner of the seat, watching the great blazing skysigns swim across the bluish 
dark The evil red and blue of the Neon lights pleased him at this moment. 
How smoothly the taxi glided 1 More like a gondola than a car It was having 
money that did that Money greased the wheels. He thought of the evening 
ahead of him, good food, good wine, good talk-above all, no worrying about 
money No damned niggling with sixpences and ‘We can’t afford this’ and ‘We 
can’t afford that 1 ’ Rosemary and Ravelston would try to stop him being 
extravagant. But he would shut than up. He’d spend every penny he had if he 
felt like it. Ten whole quid to bust! At least, five quid. The thought of Julia 
passed flickenngly through his mind and disappeared again 
He was quite .sober* when they got to Modigliani’s The monstrous 
commissionaire; like a great gfitterhig waxwork with the minimum of joints. 



6j8 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

stepped stiffly forward to open the taxi door His grim eye looked askance at 
Gordon’s clothes Not that you were expected to ‘dress’ at Modigliani’s They 
were tremendously Bohemian at Modigliani’s, of course, but there are ways 
and ways of being Bohemian, and Gordon’s way was the wrong way Gordon 
did not care He bade the taximan an affectionate farewell, and tipped him half 
a crown over his fare, whereat the commissionaire’s eye looked a little less 
grim At this moment Ravelston emerged from the doorway The 
commissionaire knew Ravelston, of course He lounged out on to the 
pavement, a tall distinguished figure, aristocratically shabby, his eye rather 
moody He was worrying already about the money this dinner was going to 
cost Gordon 

‘Ah, there you are, Gordon 1 ’ 

‘Hullo, Ravelston 1 Where’s Rosemary?’ 

‘Perhaps she’s waiting inside I don’t know her by sight, you know But I 
say, Gordon, look here 1 Before we go m, I wanted-’ 

‘Ah, look, there she is 1 ’ 

She was coming towards them, swift and debonair She threaded her way 
through the crowd with the air of some neat little destroyer gliding between 
large clumsy cargo-boats And she was nicely dressed, as usual The sub- 
shovel hat was cocked at its most provocative angle Gordon’s heart stirred 
There was a girl for you 1 He was proud that Ravelston should see her She was 
very gay tonight It was written all over her that she was not going to remind 
herself or Gordon of their last disastrous encounter. Perhaps she laughed and 
talked just a little too vivaciously as Gordon introduced them and they went 
inside But Ravelston had taken a liking to her immediately Indeed, everyone 
who met her did take a liking to Rosemary The inside of the restaurant 
overawed Gordon for a moment It was so horribly, artistically smart Dark 
gate-leg tables, pewter candlesticks, pictures by modern French painters on 
the walls. One, a street scene, looked like a Utrillo Gordon stiffened his 
shoulders Damn it, what was there to be afraid of? The five pound note was 
tucked away in its envelope in his pocket. It was Julia’s five pounds, of course, 
he wasn’t going to spend it Still, its presence gave him moral support It was a 
kind of talisman They were making for the corner table-Ravelston’s favourite 
table-at the far end Ravelston took Gordon by the arm and drew him a little 
back, out of Rosemary’s hearing. 

‘Gordon, look here!’ 

‘What?’ 

‘Look here, you’re going to have dinner with me tonight,’ 

‘Bosh! This is on me.’ 

'I do wish you would I hate to see you spending all that money ’ 

‘We won’t talk about money tonight,’ said Gordon 
i‘Fi|fey->fifty, then,’ pleaded Ravelston 
If ’s on me*’ said Gordon firmly, 

Ravelston subsided- The fat, white-haired Italian waiter was bowing and 
sssilingbeskie die comer table. But it was at Ravelston, not at Gordon, that he 
IfcflSJtoSi Gordon sat down with die feeling that he must assert himself quickly. 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 679 

He waved away the menu which the waiter had produced 
‘We must settle what we’re going to drink first/ he said 
‘Beer for me/ said Ravelston, with a sort of gloomy haste ‘Beer’s the only 
drink I care about ’ 

‘Me too/ echoed Rosemary 

‘Oh, rot 1 We’ve got to have some wine What do you like, red or white’ Give 
me the wme list/ he said to the waiter 

‘Then let’s have a plain Bordeaux M 6 doc or St Julien or something/ said 
Ravelston 

‘I adore St Julien/ said Rosemary, who thought she remembered that St 
Julien was always the cheapest wme on the list 

Inwardly, Gordon damned their eyes There you are, you see* They were in 
league against him already They were trying to prevent him from spending 
his money There was going to be that deadly, hateful atmosphere of ‘You 
can’t afford it’ hanging over everything It made him all the more anxious to be 
extravagant A moment ago he would have compromised on Burgundy Now 
he decided that they must have something really expensive-something fizzy, 
something with a kick m it Champagne’ No, they’d never let him have 
champagne Ah 1 

‘Have you got any Asti’’ he said to the waiter 

The waiter suddenly beamed, thinking of his corkage He had grasped now 
that Gordon and not Ravelston was the host He answered m the peculiar 
mixture of French and English which he affected 

‘Asti, sir’ Yes, sir Very mce Asti 1 Asti Spumanti Tres fin! Tr&s mf r 
Ravelston’s worried eye sought Gordon’s across the table You can’t afford 
it 1 his eye pleaded 

‘Is that one of those fizzy wines’’ said Rosemary 

‘Very fizzy, madame Very lively wme Tris vif Pop*’ His fat hands made a 
gesture, picturmg cascades of foam 
‘Asti/ said Gordon, before Rosemary could stop him 
Ravelston looked miserable He knew that Asti would cost Gordon ten or 
fifteen shillings a bottle Gordon pretended not to notice He began talking 
about Stendhal-association with Duchesse de Sansevenna and her force vtn 
d’Asti ’ Along came the Asti m a pail of ice-a mistake, that, as Ravelston could 
have told Gordon Out came the cork Pop 1 The wild wme foamed into the 
wide flat glasses Mysteriously the atmosphere of the table changed. 
Something had happened to all three of them Even before it was drunk the 
wme had worked its magic Rosemary had lost her nervousness, Ravelston his 
worried preoccupation with the expense, Gordon his defiant resolve to be 
extravagant. They were eatmg anchovies and bread and butter, fried sole, roast 
pheasant with bread sauce and chipped potatoes, but principally they were 
drinking and talking. And how brilliantly they were talking-or so it seemed to 
them, anyway! They talked about the bloodiness of modem life and the 
bloodiness of modem-books What else is there to talk about nowadays? As 
usual (but, oh! how differently, now that there was money m his pocket and he 
didn’t redly believe what lie wa^ saying) Gordon descanted on the deadness, 



S8o Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

the dreadfulness of the age we live in French letters and machine-guns' The 
movies and the Daily Mail 1 It was a bone-deep truth when he walked the 
streets with a couple of coppers in his pocket, but it was a joke at this moment 
It was great fun-it is fun when you have good food and good wine inside 
you-to demonstrate that we live m a dead and rotting world He was being 
witty at the expense of the modern literature, they were all being witty With 
the fine scorn of the unpublished Gordon knocked down reputation after 
reputation Shaw, Yeats, Eliot, Joyce, Huxley, Lewis, Hemmgway-each with 
a careless phrase or two was shovelled into the dustbin What fun it all was, if 
only it could last' And of course, at this particular moment, Gordon believed 
that it could last Of the first bottle of Asti, Gordon drank three glasses, 
Ravelston two, and Rosemary one Gordon became aware that a girl at the 
table opposite was watching him A tall elegant girl with a shell-pink skin and 
wonderful, almond-shaped eyes Rich, obviously, one of the moneyed 
intelligentsia She thought him mterestmg-was wondering who he was 
Gordon found himself manufacturing special witticisms for her benefit And 
he was being witty, there was no doubt about that That too was money 
Money greasing the wheels-- wheels of thought as well as wheels of taxis 
But somehow the second bottle of Asti was not such a success as the first To 
begin with there was uncomfortableness over its ordering Gordon beckoned 
to the waiter 

‘Have you got another bottle of this*’ 

The waiter beamed fatly ‘Yes, sir' Mats certainement, monsieur 
Rosemary frowned and tapped Gordon’s foot under the table ‘No, Gordon, 
no' You’re not to.’ 

‘Not to what*’ 

‘Order another bottle We don’t want it ’ 

‘Oh, bosh' Get another bottle, waiter ’ 

‘Yes, sir ’ 

Ravelston rubbed his nose With eyes too guilty to meet Gordon’s he looked 
at his wme glass ‘Look here, Gordon Let me stand this bottle I’d like to.’ 
‘Bosh 1 ’ repeated Gordon 
‘Get half a bottle, then,’ said Rosemary. 

‘A whole bottle, waiter,’ said Gordon 

After that nothing was the same They still talked, laughed, argued, but 
things were not the same The elegant girl at the table opposite had ceased 
watching Gordon. Somehow, Gordon wasn’t being witty any longer. It is 
almost always a mistake to order a second bottle It is like bathing for a second 
time on a summer day. However warm the day is, however much you have 
enjoyed your first bathe, you are always sorry for it if you go m a second time 
The magic had departed from the wme It seemed to foam and sparkle less, it 
was merely a clogging sourish liquid which you gulped down half in disgust 
and hah in hopes of getting drunk quicker Gordon was now definitely though 
secretly drunk. One half of him was drunk and the other half sober. He was 
begfeming to have that peculiar blurred feeling, as though your features had 
^Wofieamd your fingers grown thicker, which you have in the second stage of 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 68 1 

drunkenness But the sober half of him was still in command to outward 
appearance, anyway The conversation grew more and more tedious Gordon 
and Ravelston talked in the detached uncomfortable manner of people who 
have had a little scene and are not gomg to admit it They talked about 
Shakespeare The conversation tailed off into a long discussion about the 
meaning of Hamlet It was very dull Rosemary stifled a yawn While 
Gordon’s sober half talked, his drunken half stood aside and listened Drunken 
half was very angry They’d spoiled his evemng, damn them 1 with their 
arguing about that second bottle All he wanted now was to be properly drunk 
and have done with it Of the six glasses in the second bottle he drank four-for 
Rosemary refused more wine But you couldn’t do much on this weak stuff 
Drunken half clamoured for more drmk, and more, and more Beer by the 
quart and the bucket 1 A real good rousing drmk 1 And by God 1 he was going to 
have it later on He thought of the five pound note stowed away m his inner 
pocket He still had that to blow, anyway 

The musical clock that was concealed somewhere m Modigliani’s interior 
struck ten 

‘Shall we shove off?’ said Gordon 

Ravelston’s eyes looked pleadingly, guiltily across the table Let me share 
the bill 1 his eyes said Gordon ignored him 
‘I vote we go to the Caffe Imperial,’ he said 

The bill failed to sober him A little over two quid for the dinner, thirty bob 
for the wine He did not let the others see the bill, of course, but they saw him 
paying He threw four pound notes on to the waiter’s salver and said casually, 
‘Keep the change ’ That left him with about ten bob besides the fiver 
Ravelston was helpmg Rosemary on with her coat, as she saw Gordon throw 
notes to the waiter her lips parted in dismay. She had had no idea that the 
dinner was going to cost anything like four pounds It horrified her to see him 
throwing money about like that Ravelston looked gloomy and disapproving 
Gordon damned their eyes again Why did they have to keep on worrying? He 
could afford it, couldn’t he? He still had that fiver But by God, it wouldn’t be 
his fault if he got home with a penny left 1 
But outwardly he was quite sober, and much more subdued than he had 
been half an hour ago ‘We’d better have a taxi to the Caffe Imperial,’ he said 
‘Oh, let’s walk*’ said Rosemary ‘It’s only a step ’ 

‘No, we’ll have a taxi ’ 

They got into the taxi and were driven away, Gordon sitting next to 
Rosemary He had half a mind to put his arm round her, m spite of Ravelston’s 
presence But at that moment a swirl of cold night air came in at the window 
and blew against Gordon’s forehead It gave him a shock It was like one of 
those moments in the night when suddenly from deep sleep you are broad 
awake and full of some dreadful realizataon-as that you are doomed to die, for 
instance, or that your Efe is‘ a failure. Bor perhaps a minute he was cold saber* 
He knew all about himself and the awM folly fee was committmg-knew that he 
had squandered five pounds on utter foolishness and- was now gomg to 
squander the other fivi that belonged to JuKar. He had a fleetmg but terribly 



68 2 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

vivid vision of Julia, with her thin face and her greying hair, m the cold of her 
dismal bed-sitting room Poor, good Julia 1 Julia who had been sacrificed to 
him all her life, from whom he had borrowed pound after pound after pound, 
and now he hadn’t even the decency to keep her five intact 1 He recoiled from 
the thought, he fled back into his drunkenness as into a refuge Quick, quick, 
we’re get tin g sober 1 Booze, more booze' Recapture that first fine careless 
rapture 1 Outside, the multi-coloured window of an Italian grocery, still open, 
swam towards them He tapped sharply on the glass The taxi drew up 
Gordon began to climb out across Rosemary’s knees 

‘Where are you going, Gordon?’ 

‘To recapture that first fine careless rapture,’ said Gordon, on the pavement 

‘What?’ 

‘It’s time we laid m some more booze The pubs’ll be shutting in half an 
hour ’ 

‘No, Gordon, no 1 You’re not to get anything more to drink You’ve had 
qmte enough already ’ 

‘Wait 1 ’ 

He came out of the shop nursing a litre bottle of Chianti The grocer had 
taken the cork out for him and put it in loosely again The others had grasped 
now that he was drunk-that he must have been drinking before he met them 
It made them both embarrassed They went into the Cafe Imperial, but the 
chief thought m both their minds was to get Gordon away and to bed as 
quickly as possible Rosemary whispered behind Gordon’s back f Please don’t 
let him drink any more'’ Ravelston nodded gloomily Gordon was marching 
ahead of them to a vacant table, not in the least troubled by the stares everyone 
was casting at the wine-bottle which he carried on his arm They sat down and 
ordered coffee, and with some difficulty Ravelston restrained Gordon from 
ordering brandy as well All of them were ill at ease It was horrible in the great 
garish cafe, stuffily hot and deafenmgly noisy with the jabber of several 
hundred voices, the clatter of plates and glasses, and the intermittent squalling 
of the band All three of them wanted to get away Ravelston was still worrying 
about the expense, Rosemary was worried because Gordon was drunk, 
Gordon was restless and thirsty He had wanted to come here, but he was no 
sooner here than he wanted to escape Drunken half was clamouring for a bit of 
fun. And drunken half wasn’t going to be kept in check much longer Beer, 
beer' cried drunken half Gordon hated this stuffy place He had visions of a 
pub taproom with great oozy barrels and quart pots topped with foam He kept 
an eye on the clock. It was nearly half past ten and the pubs even m 
Westminster would shut at eleven. Mustn’t miss his beer' The bottle of wine 
was for afterwards, when the pubs were shut Rosemary was sitting opposite 
huh, talking to- Ravelston, uncomfortably but with a sufficient pretence that 
she was enjoying herself and there was nothing the matter They were still 
talking in ajpiher futile way about Shakespeare Gordon hated Shakespeare 
As h^watched’ Rosemary talking there came over him a violent, perverse desire 
iohheri She was leaning forward, her elbows on the table, he could see her 
small 1 breasts clearly through her dress. It came to him with a kind of shock, a 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 68 3 

catch of breath, which once again almost sobered him, that he had seen her 
naked She was his girl 1 He could have her whenever he wanted her 1 And by 
God, he was going to have her tonight 1 Why not? It was a fitting end to the 
evening They could find a place easily enough, there are plenty of hotels 
round Shaftesbury Avenue where they don’t ask questions if you can pay the 
bill He still had his fiver He felt her foot under the table, meaning to imprint a 
delicate caress upon it, and only succeeded m treading on her toe She drew her 
foot away from him 

‘Let’s get out of this,’ he said abruptly, and at once stood up 
‘Oh, let’s 1 ’ said Rosemary with relief 

They were m Regent Street again Down on the left Piccadilly Circus 
blazed, a horrible pool of light Rosemary’s eyes turned towards the bus stop 
opposite 

‘It’s half past ten,’ she said doubtfully ‘I’ve got to be back by eleven ’ 

‘Oh, rot' Let’s look for a decent pub I mustn’t miss my beer ’ 

‘Oh, no, Gordon 1 No more pubs tomght I couldn’t drink any more Nor 
ought you ’ 

‘It doesn’t matter Come this way ’ 

He took her by the arm and began to lead her down towards the bottom of 
Regent Street, holding her rather tight as though afraid she would escape For 
the moment he had forgotten about Ravelston Ravelston followed, wondering 
whether he ought to leave them to themselves or whether he ought to stay and 
keep an eye on Gordon Rosemary hung back, not liking the way Gordon was 
pulling at her arm 

‘Where are you taking me, Gordon?’ 

‘Round the corner, where it’s dark I want to kiss you * 

‘I don’t think I want to be kissed ’ 

‘Of course you do ’ 

‘No'* 

‘Yes'’ 

She let him take her Ravelston waited on the corner by the Regent Palace, 
uncertain what to do Gordon and Rosemary disappeared round the corner 
and were almost immediately in darker, narrower streets. The appalling faces 
of tarts, like skulls coated with pink powder, peered meaningly from several 
doorways Rosemary shrank from them Gordon was rather amused 
‘They think you’re one of them,’ he explained to her 
He stood his bottle on the pavement, carefully, against the wall, then 
suddenly seized her and twisted her backwards He wanted her badly, and he 
did not want to waste time over preliminaries He began to kiss her face all 
over, clumsily but very hard She let him do it for a moment, but it frightened 
her; his face, so close to hers, looked pale, strange, and distracted He smelt 
very strongly of wine She struggled, turning hear face away so that he was only 
kissing her hair and peck. 

‘Gordon, you mustn't!’ 

‘Why mustn’t I?’ 



684 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

‘What do you suppose I’m doing?’ 

He shoved her back against the wall, and with the careful, preoccupied 
movements of a drunken man, tried to undo the front of her dress It was of a 
kind that did not undo, as it happened This time she was angry She struggled 
violently, fending his hand aside 
‘Gordon, stop that at once 1 ’ 

‘Why?’ 

‘If you do it again I’ll smack your face ’ 

‘Smack my face 1 Don’t you come the Girl Guide with me ’ 

‘Let me go, will you 1 ’ 

‘Think of last Sunday,’ he said lewdly 
‘Gordon, if you go on I’ll hit you, honestly I will ’ 

‘Not you ’ 

He thrust his hand right into the front of her dress The movement was 
curiously brutal, as though she had been a stranger to him She grasped that 
from the expression of his face She was not Rosemary to him any longer, she 
was just a girl, a girl’s body That was the thing that upset her She struggled 
and managed to free herself from him He came after her again and clutched 
her arm She smacked his face as hard as she could and dodged neatly out of his 
reach 

‘What did you do that for?’ he said, feeling his cheek but not hurt by the 
blow 

‘I’m not going to stand that sort of thing I’m going home You’ll be 
different tomorrow ’ 

‘Rot 1 You come along with me You’re gomg to bed with me ’ 

‘Good night 1 ’ she said, and fled up the dark side street 
For a moment he thought of following her, but found his legs too heavy It 
did not seem worth while, anyway He wandered back to where Ravelston was 
still waiting, looking moody and alone, partly because he was worried about 
Gordon and partly because he was trying not to notice two hopeful tarts who 
were on patrol just behind him Gordon looked properly drunk, Ravelston 
thought His hair was tumbling down over his forehead, one side of his face 
was very pale and on the other there was a red smudge where Rosemary had 
slapped him Ravelston thought this must be the flush of drunkenness 
‘What have you done with Rosemary?’ he said, 

‘She’s gone,’ said Gordon, with a wave of his hand which was meant to 
explain everything ‘But the night’s still young ’ 

‘Look here, Gordon, it’s time you were in bed ’ 

‘In bed, yes. But not alone ’ 

He stood on the kerb gazing out into the hideous midnight-noon For a 
moment he felt quite deathly. His face was burning His whole body had a 
dreadhil, swollen, fiery feeling. His head in particular seemed on the point of 
bursting* Somehow the baleful light was bound up with his sensations He 
watched the skysigns flicking on and off, glaring red and blue, arrowing up and 
down-the awful, sinister glitter of a doomed civilization, like the still blazing 
fights of a sacking ship He caught Ravelston’s arm and made a gesture that 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 68 s 

comprehended the whole of Piccadilly Circus 
‘The lights down in hell will look just like that ’ 

‘I shouldn’t wonder ’ 

Ravelston was looking out for a disengaged taxi He must get Gordon home 
to bed without further delay Gordon wondered whether he was in joy or m 
agony That burning, bursting feeling was dreadful The sober half of him was 
not dead yet Sober half still knew with ice-cold clarity what he had done and 
what he was doing He had committed follies for which tomorrow he would 
feel like killing himself He had squandered five pounds in senseless 
extravagance, he had robbed Julia, he had insulted Rosemary And 
tomorrow-oh, tomorrow, we’ll be sober 1 Go home, go home! cried sober 
half — to you 1 said drunken half contemptuously Drunken half was still 
clamouring for a bit of fun And drunken half was the stronger A fiery clock 
somewhere opposite caught his eye Twenty to eleven Quick, before the pubs 
are shut 1 Haro' la gorge m’ard f Once again his thoughts moved lyrically He 
felt a hard round shape under his arm, discovered that it was the Chianti 
bottle, and tweaked out the cork Ravelston was waving to a taxi-driver 
without managing to catch his eye He heard a shocked squeal from the tarts 
behind Turning, he saw with horror that Gordon had up-ended the bottle and 
was drinking from it 
‘Hi 1 Gordon 1 ’ 

He sprang towards him and forced his arm down A gout of wine went down 
Gordon’s collar 

‘For God’s sake be careful' You don’t want the police to get hold of you, do 
you?’ 

‘I want a drink,’ complained Gordon 
‘But dash it 1 You can’t start drinking here ’ 

‘Take me to a pub,’ said Gordon 

Ravelston rubbed his nose helplessly ‘Oh, God' I suppose that’s better than 
drinking on the pavement Come on, we’ll go to a pub You shall have your 
drink there ’ 

Gordon recorked his bottle carefully Ravelston shepherded him across the 
circus, Gordon clinging to his arm, but not for support, for his legs were still 
quite steady They halted on the island, then managed to find a gap m the 
traffic and went down the Haymarket 

In the pub the air seemed wet with beer It was all a mist of beer shot 
through with the sickly tang of whisky Along the bar a press of men seethed, 
dowmng with Faustlike eagerness their last drinks before eleven should sound 
its knell, Gordon slid easily through the crowd He was not in a mood to worry 
about a few jostlings and elbowings In a moment he had fetched up at the bar 
between a stout commercial traveller drinking Guinness and a tali, lean, 
decayed major type of man with droopy moustaches, whose entire 
conversation seemed to consist of ‘What hof and ‘What, what'* Gordon threw 
half a crown on to the beer-wet bar, 

‘A quart of bitter, please!? * 

‘No quart pots here!’ cried the harassed barmaid, measuring pegs of whisky 



686 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

with one eye on the clock 

‘Quart pots on the the top shelf, Effie*’ shouted the landlord over his 
shoulder, from the other side of the bar 

The barmaid hauled the beer-handle three times hurriedly The monstrous 
glass pot was set before him He lifted it What a weight’ A pmt of pure water 
weighs a pound and a quarter Down with it* Swish-gurgle* A long, long sup 
of beer flowed gratefully down his gullet He paused for breath, and felt a little 
sickish Come on, now for another Swish-gurgle* It almost choked him this 
time But stick it out, stick it out* Through the cascade of beer that poured 
down his throat and seemed to drown his ears he heard the landlord’s shout 
‘Last orders, gentlemen, please*’ For a moment he removed his face from the 
pot, gasped, and got his breath back Now for the last Swish-gurgle* A-a-ah* 
Gordon set down the pot Emptied in three gulps-not bad He clattered it on 
the bar 

‘Hi* Give me the other half of that-quick*’ 

‘What ho*’ said the major 

‘Coming it a bit, aren’t you?’ said the commercial traveller 

Ravelston, farther down the bar and hemmed in by several men, saw what 
Gordon was doing He called to him, ‘Hi, Gordon*’, frowned and shook his 
head, too shy to say m front of everybody, ‘Don’t drink any more ’ Gordon 
settled himself on his legs He was still steady, but consciously steady His 
head seemed to have swollen to an immense size, his whole body had the same 
horrible, swollen, fiery feeling as before Languidly he lifted the refilled beer- 
pot He did not want it now Its smell nauseated him It was just a hateful, pale 
yellow, sickly-tasting liquid Like urine, almost* That bucketful of stuff to be 
forced down into his bursting guts-horrible* But come on, no flinching* What 
else are we here for? Down with it* Here she is so near my nose So tip her up 
and down she goes Swish-gurgle* 

In the same moment something dreadful happened His gullet had shut up 
of its own accord, or the beer had missed his mouth It was pouring all over 
him, a tidal wave of beer He was drowning m beer like lay-brother Peter m the 
Ingoldsby Legends Help* He tried to shout, choked, and let fall the beer-pot 
There was a flurry all round him. People were leaping aside to avoid the jet of 
beer Crash* went the pot Gordon stood rocking. Mm, bottles, mirrors were 
gomg round and round He was falling, losing consciousness But dimly visible 
before him was a black upright shape, sole point of stability m a reeling 
world-the beer-handle He clutched it, swung, held tight Ravelston started 
towards him 

The barmaid leaned indignantly over the bar The roundabout world 
slowed down and stopped. Gordon’s brain was quite clear 

‘Here! What are you hanging on to the beer-handle for? 5 

*AH over my bloody trousers!’ .-dried doe commercial traveller 
‘What am I hanging onto thei^-handle for? 5 

* Yesl What are $pu hogging on to the beer-handle for? 5 

Gordon swung itdeways. The elongated face of the major peered 

whh wfet mmisradhes drooping* 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 687 

‘She says, “What am I hanging on to the beer-handle for?” ’ 

‘What ho' What’’ 

Ravelston had forced his way between several men and reached him He put 
a strong arm round Gordon’s waist and hoisted him to his feet 
‘Stand up, for God’s sake' You’re drunk ’ 

‘Drunk?’ said Gordon 

Everyone was laughing at them Ravelston’s pale face flushed 
‘Two and three those mugs cost,’ said the barmaid bitterly 
‘And what about my bloody trousers?’ said the commercial traveller 
‘I’ll pay for the mug,’ said Ravelston He did so ‘Now come on out of it 
You’re drunk ’ 

He began to shepherd Gordon towards the door, one arm round his 
shoulder, the other holding the Chianti bottle, which he had taken from him 
earlier Gordon freed himself He could walk with perfect steadiness He said 
in a dignified manner 

‘Drunk did you say I was?’ 

Ravelston took his arm again ‘Yes, I’m afraid you are Decidedly ’ 

‘Swan swam across the sea, well swam swan,’ said Gordon 
‘Gordon, you are drunk The sooner you’re in bed the better ’ 

‘First cast out the beam that is in thine own eye before thou castest out the 
mote that is m thy brother’s,’ said Gordon 

Ravelston had got him out on to the pavement by this time ‘We’d better get 
hold of a taxi,’ he said, looking up and down the street 
There seemed to be no taxis about, however The people were streaming 
noisily out of the pub, which was on the pomt of closing Gordon felt better m 
the open air. His brain had never been clearer The red satamc gleam of a Neon 
light, somewhere in the distance, put a new and brilliant idea into his head He 
plucked at Ravelston’s arm 
‘Ravelston' I say, Ravelston’’ 

‘What?’ 

‘Let’s pick up a couple of tarts ’ 

In spite of Gordon’s drunken state, Ravelston was scandalized ‘My dear old 
chap' You can’t do that kind of thing ’ 

‘Don’t be so damned upper-class Why not?’ 

‘But how could you, dash ltl After you’ve just said good night to 
Rosemary-a really charming girl like that’’ 

‘At night all cats are grey,’ said Gordon, with the feeling that he voiced a 
profound and cynical wisdom 

Ravelston decided to ignore this remark ‘We’d better walk up to Piccadilly 
Circus,’ he said. ‘There’ll be plenty of taxis there ’ 

The theatres were emptying Crowds of people and streams of cars flowed to 
and fro in the frightful corpse-light. Gordon’s brain was marvellously clear. 
He knew what folly and. evil he had committed and was about to commit And 
yet after all it hardly seemed to matter. He saw as something far, far away,like 
something seen through the wrong end of the telescope, his thirty years* hts 
wasted life, the blank future, Juba’s five pounds, Rosemary, He said with a sort 



688 


Keep the Aspidistra Flying 


of philosophic interest 

‘Look at the Neon lights' Look at those awful blue ones over the rubber 
shop When I see those lights I know that I’m a damned soul ’ 

‘Quite,’ said Ravelston, who was not listening ‘Ah, there’s a taxi 1 ’ He 
signalled ‘Damn' He didn’t see me Wait here a second ’ 

He left Gordon by the Tube station and hurried across the street For a little 
while Gordon’s mind receded into blankness Then he was aware of two hard 
yet youthful faces, like the faces of young predatory animals, that had come 
close up to his own They had blackened eye-brows and hats that were like 
vulgarer versions of Rosemary’s He was exchanging badinage with them 
This seemed to him to have been going on for several minutes 
‘Hullo, Dora' Hullo, Barbara' (He knew their names, it seemed ) And how 
are you 5 And how’s old England’s winding-sheet 5 ’ 

‘Oo-haven’t you got a cheek, just 1 ’ 

‘And what are you up to at this time of night 5 ’ 

‘Oo-jes’ strolling around ’ 

‘Like a lion, seeking whom he may devour 5 ’ 

‘Oo-you haven’t half got a cheek' Hasn’t he got a cheek, Barbara 5 You have 
got a cheek'’ 

Ravelston had caught the taxi and brought it round to where Gordon was 
standing He stepped out, saw Gordon between the two girls, and stood 
aghast 

‘Gordon' Oh, my God' What the devil have you been doing 5 ’ 

‘Let me introduce you Dora and Barbara,’ said Gordon 
For a moment Ravelston looked almost angry As a matter of fact, Ravelston 
was incapable of being properly angry Upset, pained, embarrassed-yes, but 
not angry He stepped forward with a miserable effort not to notice the two 
girls’ existence Once he noticed them the game was up He took Gordon by 
the arm and would have bundled him into the taxi 
‘Come on, Gordon, for God’s sake' Here’s the taxi We’ll go straight home 
and put you to bed ’ 

Dora caught Gordon’s other arm and hauled him out of reach as though he 
had been a stolen handbag 

‘What bloody business is it of yours 5 ’ she cried ferociously 
‘You don’t want to insult these two ladies, I hope 5 ’ said Gordon 
Ravelston faltered, stepped back, rubbed his nose It was a moment to be 
firm, but Ravelston had never in his life been firm He looked from Dora to 
Gordon, from Gordon to Barbara That was fatal Once he had looked them m 
the face he was lost Oh, Godl What could he do? They were human beings-he 
couldn’t insult them. The same instinct that sent his hand into his pocket at the 
very sight of a beggar made him helpless at this moment The poor, wretched 
girfsl. He hadn’t the heart to send them packing into the night. Suddenly he - 
reaped that he would have to go through with this abominable adventure into 
which Gordon had led him. For the first time in his life he was let in for gomg 
home with a tart. 


Ttetdash it all'’ he said feebly. 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 


689 


‘ Allons-y,’ said Gordon 

The taximan had taken his direction at a nod from Dora Gordon slumped 
into the corner seat and seemed immediately to sink into some immense abyss 
from which he rose again more gradually and with only partial consciousness 
of what he had been doing He was gliding smoothly through darkness starred 
with lights Or were the lights moving and he stationary? It was like being on 
the ocean bottom, among the luminous, gliding fishes The fancy returned to 
him that he was a damned soul m hell The landscape m hell would be just like 
this Ravines of cold evil-coloured fire, with darkness all above But m hell 
there would be torment Was this torment? He strove to classify his sensations 
The momentary lapse into unconsciousness had left him weak, sick, shaken, 
his forehead seemed to be splitting He put out a hand It encountered a knee, a 
garter, and a small soft hand which sought mechanically for his He became 
aware that Ravelston, sitting opposite, was tapping his toe urgently and 
nervously 

‘Gordon 1 Gordon 1 Wake up 1 ’— 

‘What?’ 

‘Gordon 1 Oh, damn* Causons enfrangais Qu’est-ce que tu as fait ? Crois-tu que 
je veux coucher avec une sale— oh, damnation 1 ’ 

‘Oo-parley-voo francey 1 ’ squealed the girls 

Gordon was mildly amused Do Ravelston good, he thought A parlour 
Socialist going home with a tart' The first genmnely proletarian action of his 
life As though aware of this thought, Ravelston subsided into his corner in 
silent misery, sitting as far away from Barbara as possible The taxi drew up at 
a hotel in a side-street, a dreadful, shoddy, low place it was The ‘hotel’ sign 
over the door looked skew-eyed The windows were almost dark, but the 
sound of singmg, boozy and dreary, trickled from within. Gordon staggered 
out of the taxi and felt for Dora’s arm Give us a hand, Dora. Mind the step 
What ho 1 

A smallish, darkish, smelly hallway, lino-carpeted, mean, uncared-for, and 
somehow impermanent From a room somewhere on the left the singing 
swelled, mournful as a church organ A cross-eyed, evil-looking chambermaid 
appeared from nowhere She and Dora seemed to know one another. What a 
mug* No competition there From the room on the left a single voice took up 
the song with would-be facetious emphasis 

‘The man that lasses a pretty girl 
And goes and tells his mother, 

Ought to have his lips cut off. 

Ought to—* 

It tailed away, full of the ineffable, undisguisable sadness of debauchery, A 
very young voice it sounded. The voice of some poor boy who in his heart only 
wanted to be at home with his mother and sisters, playing hunt-the-slipper. 
There was a party of young fools in there, on the razzle with whisky and girls. 
The tune reminded Gordon. He turned to Ravelston as he came m, Barbara 
following 



6po Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

‘Where’s my Chianti?’ he said 

Ravelston gave him the bottle His face looked pale, harassed, hunted, 
almost With guilty restless movements he kept himself apart from Barbara 
He could not touch her or even look at her, and yet to escape was beyond him 
His eyes sought Gordon’s ‘For the love of God can’t we get out of it 
somehow?’ they signalled Gordon frowned at him Stick it out 1 No flinching! 
He took Dora’s arm again Come on, Dora 1 Now for those stairs Ah* Wait a 
moment 

Her arm round his waist, supporting him, Dora drew him aside Down the 
darkish, smelly stairs a young woman came mmcingly, buttoning on a glove, 
after her a bald, middle-aged man m evening clothes, black overcoat, and white 
silk muffler, his opera hat in his hand He walked past them with small mean 
mouth tightened, pretending not to see them A family man, by the guilty look 
in his eye Gordon watched the gaslight gleam on the back of his bald head His 
predecessor In the same bed, probably The mantle of Elisha Now then, 
Dora, up we go 1 Ah, these stairs 1 Difficilis ascensus Averm That’s right, here 
we are' ‘Mmd the step,’ said Dora They were on the landing Black and white 
lino like a chessboard White-painted doors A smell of slops and a fainter 
smell of stale linen 

We this way, you that At the other door Ravelston halted, his fingers on the 
handle. He could not-no, he could not do it He could not enter that dreadful 
room For the last time his eyes, like those of a dog about to be whipped, 
turned upon Gordon ‘Must I, must I?’ his eyes said Gordon eyed him 
sternly. Stick it out, Regulus' March to your doom 1 Atqui sciebat quae sibi 
Barbara It is a far, far more proletarian thing that you do And then with 
startling suddenness Ravelston’s face cleared An expression of relief, almost 
of joy, stole over it A wonderful thought had occurred to him After all, you 
could always pay the girl without actually doing anything 1 Thank God 1 He set 
his shoulders, plucked up courage, went m The door shut 

So here we are A mean, dreadful room Lmo on the floor, gas-fire, huge 
double bed with sheets vaguely dmgy Over the bed a framed coloured picture 
from La Vie Partsienne A mistake, that Sometimes the originals don’t 
compare so well And, by Jove* on the bamboo table by the window, positively 
an aspidistra 1 Hast thou found me, O mine enemy? But come here, Dora Let’s 
have a look at you. 

He seemed to be lying on the bed He could not see very well Her youthful, 
rapacious face, with blackened eyebrows, leaned over him as he sprawled 
there 

‘How about my present?’ she demanded, half wheedling, half menacing. 

Never mmd that now To work 1 Come here Not a bad mouth Come here 
Come closer. Ah* 

No* No use. Impossible. The will but not the way The spirit is willing but 
the flesh is weak. Try again No. The booze, it must be. See Macbeth One last 
try. No, no use Not this evening. I’m afraid 

AK right, Dora, don’t you worry You’ll get your two quid all right. We 
aren’t paying by results. 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 691 

He made a clumsy gesture ‘Here, give us that bottle That bottle off the 
dressing-table ’ 

Dora brought it Ah, that’s better That at least doesn’t fail With hands that 
had swollen to monstrous size he up-ended the Chianti bottle The wine 
flowed down his throat, bitter and choking, and some of it went up his nose It 
overwhelmed him He was slipping, sliding, falling off the bed His head met 
the floor His legs were still on the bed For a while he lay m this position Is 
this the way to live ? Down below the youthful voices were still mournfully 
singing 


‘For tonight we’ll merry be, 

For tonight we’ll merry be, 

For tonight we’ll merry be-e-e- 
Tomorrow we’ll be so-ober 1 ’ 


9 


And, by Jove, tomorrow we were sober 1 

Gordon emerged from some long, sickly dream to the consciousness that the 
books in the lendmg library were the wrong way up They were all lying on 
their sides Moreover, for some reason their backs had turned white-white 
and shiny, like porcelain 

He opened his eyes a little wider and moved an arm Small rivulets of pain, 
seemingly touched off by the movement, shot through his body at unexpected 
places-down the calves of his legs, for instance, and up both sides of his head 
He perceived that he was lying on his side, with a hard smooth pillow under his 
cheek and a coarse blanket scratching his chm and pushing its hairs into his 
mouth Apart from the minor pains that stabbed him every time he moved, 
there was a large, dull sort of pain which was not localized but which seemed to 
hover all over him 

Suddenly he flung off the blanket and sat up He was in a police cell At this 
moment a frightful spasm of nausea overcame him Dimly perceiving awe in 
the corner, he crept towards it and was violently sick, three or four times 

After that, for several minutes, he was in agonizing pain He could scarcely 
stand on his feet, his head throbbed as though it were going to burst, and the 
light seemed like some scalding white liquid pouring into his brain through the 
sockets of his eyes* He sat on the bed holding his head between his hands 
Presently, when some of the throbbing had died down, he had another look 
about him. The cell measured about twelve feet long by six wide and was very 
high. The walls were all of white porcelain bricks, horribly white and clean He 
wondered dully how they cleaned as high up as the ceiling Perhaps with a 
hose, he reflected. At one end there wara little barred window^ very high up, 



6p2 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

and at the other end, over the door, an electric bulb let into the wall and 
protected by a stout grating The thing he was sitting on was not actually a bed, 
but a shelf with one blanket and a canvas pillow The door was of steel, painted 
green In the door there was a little round hole with a flap on the outside 
Having seen this much he lay down and pulled the blanket over him again 
He had no further curiosity about his surroundings As to what had happened 
last night, he remembered everything-at least, he remembered everything up 
to the time when he had gone with Dora into the room with the aspidistra God 
knew what had happened after that There had been some kind of bust-up and 
he had landed m the clink He had no notion of what he had done, it might be 
murder for all he knew In any case he did not care He turned his face to the 
wall and pulled the blanket over his head to shut out the light 
After a long time the spyhole m the door was pushed aside Gordon 
managed to turn his head round His neck-muscles seemed to creak Through 
the spyhole he could see a blue eye and a semi-circle of pink chubby cheek 
‘’Ja do with a cup of tea’’ a voice said 

Gordon sat up and instantly felt very sick again He took his head between 
his hands and groaned The thought of a cup of hot tea appealed to him, but he 
knew it would make him sick if it had sugar m it 
‘Please,’ he said 

The police constable opened a partition m the top half of the door and 
passed m a thick white mug of tea It had sugar m it The constable was a solid 
rosy young man of about twenty-five, with a kind face, white eyelashes, and a 
tremendous chest It reminded Gordon of the chest of a carthorse He spoke 
with a good accent but with vulgar turns of speech For a minute or so he stood 
regarding Gordon 

‘You weren’t half bad last night,’ he said finally 
‘I’m bad now ’ 

‘You was worse last night, though What you go and hit the sergeant for?’ 
‘Did I hit the sergeant?’ 

‘Did you? Coo' He wasn’t half wild He turns to me and he says-holdmg his 
ear he was, like this-he says, “Now, if that man wasn’t too drunk to stand. I’d 
knock his block off ” It’s all gone down on your charge sheet Drunk and 
disorderly You’d only ha’ bin drunk and incapable if you hadn’t of hit the 
sergeant ’ 

‘Do you know what I shall get for this?’ 

‘Five quid or fourteen days You’ll go up before Mr Croom, Lucky for you it 
wasn’t Mr Walker He’d give you a month without the option, Mr Walker 
would. Very severe on the drunks he is Teetotaller ’ 

Gordon had drunk some of the tea. It was nauseatmgly sweet but its warmth 
made him feel stronger. He gulped it down At this moment a nasty, snarling 
sort of voice-the sergeant whom Gordon had hit, no doubt-yelped from 
somewhere outside: 

‘Take that man out and get him washed. Black Maria leaves at half past 
nine*’ 

? Tine constable hastened to open the cell door. As soon as Gordon stepped 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 69 3 

outside he felt worse then ever This was partly because it was much colder m 
the passage than m the cell He walked a step or two, and then suddenly his 
head was going round and round ‘I’m going to be sick 1 ’ he cried He was 
falling-he flung out a hand and stopped himself against the wall The 
constable’s strong arm went round him Across the arm, as over a rail, Gordon 
sagged, doubled up and limp A jet of vomit burst from him It was the tea, of 
course There was a gutter running along the stone floor At the end of the 
passage the moustachio’d sergeant, in tunic without a belt, stood with his hand 
on his hip, looking on disgustedly 
‘Dirty little tyke,’ he muttered, and turned away 
‘Come on, old chap,’ said the constable ‘You’ll be better m half a mo’ ’ 

He half led, half dragged Gordon to a big stone sink at the end of the passage 
and helped him to strip to the waist His gentleness was astonishing He 
handled Gordon almost like a nurse handling a child Gordon had recovered 
enough strength to sluice himself with the ice-cold water and rinse his mouth 
out The constable gave him a torn towel to dry himself with and then led him 
back to the cell 

‘Now you sit quiet till the Black Maria comes And take my tip-when you go 
up to the court, you plead guilty and say you won’t do it again Mr Croom 
won’t be hard on you ’ 

‘Where are my collar and tie?’ said Gordon 

‘We took ’em away last night You’ll get ’em back before you go up to court 
We had a bloke hung himself with his tie, once ’ 

Gordon sat down on the bed For a little while he occupied himself by 
calculating the number of porcelain bricks m the walls, then sat with his 
elbows on his knees, his head between his hands He was still aching all over, 
he felt weak, cold, jaded, and, above all, bored He wished that boring business 
of going up to the court could be avoided somehow The thought of being put 
into some jolting vehicle and taken across London to hang about in chilly cells 
and passages, and of having to answer questions and be lectured by 
magistrates, bored him indescribably All he wanted was to be left alone But 
presently there was the sound of several voices farther down the passage, and 
then of feet approaching The partition m the door was opened 
‘Couple of visitors for you,’ the constable said 

Gordon was bored by the very thought of visitors Unwillingly he looked 
up, and saw Flaxman and Ravelston looking in upon him How they had got 
there together was a mystery, but Gordon felt not the faintest curiosity about 
it. They bored him He wished they would go away, 

‘Hullo, chappie 1 ’ said Flaxman 

‘ You here?’ said Gordon with a sort of weary offensiveness 
Ravelston looked miserable. He had been up since the very early morning, 
looking for Gordon This was the first time he had seen the interior of a police 
cell His face shrank with disgust as he looked at the chilly white-tiled place 
with its shameless wc.m the comer. But Flaxman was more accustomed to 
this kind of thing He cocked a practised eye at Gordon 
Tve seen ’em worse,’ he said cheerfully ‘Give him a pratne oyster andhe^d 



694 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

buck up something wonderful D’you know what your eyes look like, chappie?’ 
he added to Gordon ‘They look as if they’d been taken out and poached 5 
‘I was drunk last night,’ said Gordon, his head between his hands 
‘I gathered somethmg of the kind, old chappie ’ 

‘Look here, Gordon,’ said Ravelston, ‘we came to bail you out, but it seems 
we’re too late They’re taking you up to court in a few minutes’ time This is a 
bloody show It’s a pity you didn’t give them a false name when they brought 
you here last night ’ 

‘Did I tell them my name?’ 

‘You told them everything I wish to God I hadn’t let you out of my sight 
You slipped out of that house somehow and into the street ’ 

‘Wandering up and down Shaftesbury Avenue, drinking out of a bottle,’ 
said Flaxman appreciatively ‘But you oughtn’t to have hit the sergeant, old 
chappie 1 That was a bit of bloody foolishness And I don’t mind telling you 
Mother Wisbeach is on your track When your pal here came round this 
mormng and told her you’d been for a night on the tiles, she took on as if you’d 
done a bloody murder ’ 

‘And look here, Gordon,’ said Ravelston 

There was the familiar note of discomfort m his face It was somethmg about 
money, as usual Gordon looked up Ravelston was gazing into the distance 
‘Look here ’ 

‘What?’ 

‘About your fine You’d better leave that to me I’ll pay it ’ 

‘No, you won’t ’ 

‘My dear old chap 1 They’ll send you to jail if I don’t 
‘Oh, hell 1 1 don’t care ’ 

He did not care At this moment he did not care if they sent him to prison for 
a year Of course he couldn’t pay his fine himself He knew without even 
needing to look that he had no money left. He would have given it all to Dora, 
or more probably she would have pinched it He lay down on the bed again and 
turned his back on the others In the sulky, sluggish state that he was m, his 
sole desire was to get rid of them. They made a few more attempts to talk to 
him, but he would not answer, and presently they went away. Fiaxman’s voice 
boomed cheerfully down the passage He was giving Ravelston minute 
instructions as to how to make a praine oyster. 

The rest of that day was very beastly. Beastly was the nde m the Black 
Maria, which, inside, was like nothing so much as a miniature public lavatory, 
with tiny cubicles down each side, into which you were locked and in which 
you had barely room to sit down Beastlier yet was the long wait m one of the 
cells adjoining the magistrate’s court This cell was an exact replica of the cell 
at the police station, even to having precisely the same number of porcelain 
bricks. Butifidififered from the police station cell in being repulsively dirty It 
was eoMy but the air was so fend as to be almost unbreathable Prisoners were 
coming and going all the time They would be thrust into the cell, taken out 
after an hour or two to go up to the court, and then perhaps brought back again 
to iwahr whiie the magistrate decided upon thear sentence or fresh witnesses 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 6 95 

were sent for There were always five or six men in the cell, and there was 
nothing to sit on except the plank bed And the worst was that nearly all of 
them used the w c -there, publicly, in the tiny cell They could not help it 
There was nowhere else to go And the plug of the beastly thing did not even 
pull properly 

Until the afternoon Gordon felt sick and weak He had had no chance to 
shave, and his face was hatefully scrubby At first he merely sat on the corner of 
the plank bed, at the end nearest the door, as far away from the w c as he could 
get, and took no notice of the other prisoners They bored and disgusted him, 
later, as his headache wore off, he observed them with a faint interest There 
was a professional burglar, a lean worried-looking man with grey hair, who 
was in a terrible stew about what would happen to his wife and kids if he were 
sent to jail He had been arrested for ‘loitering with intent to enter’-a vague 
offence for which you generally get convicted if there are previous convictions 
against you He kept walking up and down, flicking the fingers of his right 
hand with a curious nervous gesture, and exclaiming against the unfairness of 
it There was also a deaf mute who stank like a ferret, and a small middle-aged 
Jew with a fur-collared overcoat, who had been buyer to a large firm of kosher 
butchers He had bolted with twenty-seven pounds, gone to Aberdeen, of all 
places, and spent the money on tarts He too had a grievance, for he said his 
case ought to have been tried in the rabbi’s court instead of bemg turned over 
to the police There was also a publican who had embezzled his Christmas club 
money He was a big, hearty, prosperous-looking man of about thirty-five, 
with a loud red face and a loud blue overcoat-the sort of man who, if he were 
not a publican, would be a bookie His relatives had paid back the embezzled 
money, all except twelve pounds, but the club members had decided to 
prosecute There was something m this man’s eyes that troubled Gordon He 
carried everything off with a swagger, but all the while there Was that blank, 
staring look m his eyes, he would fall into a kind of reverie at every gap m the 
conversation It was somehow rather dreadful to see him There he was, still in 
his smart clothes, with the splendour of a publican’s life only a month or two 
behind him, and now he was ruined, probably for ever Like all London 
publicans he was m the claw of the brewer, he would be sold up and his 
furniture and fittings seized, and when he came out of jail he would never have 
a pub or a job again 

The morning wore on with dismal slowness You were allowed to 
smoke-matches were forbidden, but the constable on duty outside would give 
you a light through the trap in the door Nobody had any cigarettes except the 
publican, who had his pockets full of them and distributed them freely 
Prisoners came and went A ragged dirty man who claimed to be a coster ‘up’ 
for obstruction was put into the cell for half an hour He talked a great deal, but 
the others were deeply suspicious of him, when he was taken out again they all 
declared he was a ‘split’. The police, it was said, often put a ‘split’ into the cells, 
disguised as a prisoner, to pick up information Once there was great 
excitement when the constable whispered through the trap that a murderer, or 
would-be murderer* was being put into die cell next door He was a youth of 



696 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

eighteen who had stabbed his ‘tart’ m the belly, and she was not expected to 
live Once the trap opened and the tired, pale face of a clergyman looked m He 
saw the burglar, said wearily, £ You here again, Jones?’ and went away again 
Dinner, so-called, was served out at about twelve o’clock All you got was a cup 
of tea and two slices of bread and marg You could have food sent m, though, if 
you could pay for it The publican had a good dinner sent in m covered dishes, 
but he had no appetite for it, and gave most of it away Ravelston was still 
hanging about the court, waiting for Gordon’s case to come on, but he did not 
know the ropes well enough to have food sent m to Gordon Presently the 
burglar and the publican were taken away, sentenced, and brought back to wait 
till the Black Maria should take them off to jail They each got nine months 
The publican questioned the burglar about what prison was like There was a 
conversation of unspeakable obscemty about the lack of women there 

Gordon’s case came on at half past two, and it was over so quickly that it 
seemed preposterous to have waited all that time for it Afterwards he could 
remember nothing about the court except the coat of arms over the 
magistrate’s chair The magistrate was dealing with the drunks at the rate of 
two a minute To the tune of { John-Smith-drunk-and-mcapable-drunk?-yes- 
six-shilhngs-move-on-wex? 1 ’ they filed past the railings of the dock, precisely 
like a crowd taking tickets at a booking-office Gordon’s case, however, took 
two minutes instead of thirty seconds, because he had been disorderly and the 
sergeant had to testify that Gordon had struck him on the ear and called him 
a — bastard There was also a mild sensation in the court because Gordon, 
when questioned at the police station, had described himself as a poet He must 
have been very drunk to say a thing like that The magistrate looked at him 
suspiciously 

‘I see you call yourself a poet Are you a poet?’ 

T wnte poetry,’ said Gordon sulkily 

‘Hm 1 Well, it doesn’t seem to teach you to behave yourself, does it? You will 
pay five pounds or go to prison for fourteen days Next r 

And that was all Nevertheless, somewhere at the back of the court a bored 
reporter had pricked up his ears 

On the other side of the court there was a room where a police sergeant sat 
with a large ledger, entering up the drunks’ fines and taking payment Those 
who could not pay were taken back to the cells, Gordon had expected this to 
happen to himself. He was quite resigned to going to prison But when he 
emerged from the court it was to find that Ravelston was waiting there and had 
already paid his fine for him Gordon did not protest He allowed Ravelston to 
pack him into a taxi and take him back to the flat in Regent’s Park. As soon as 
they got there Gordon had a hot bath; he needed one, after the beastly 
contaminating grime of the last twelve hours. Ravelston lent him a razor, lent 
him a cdean%Jnft and pyjamas and socks and underclothes, even went out of 
dbops hnd bought him a toothbrush He was strangely solicitous about 
Gordon. He ftould not rid himself of a guilty feeling that what had happened 
last night was mainly hiS own fault, he ought to have put his foot down and 
taksh Golden home as soon as he showed signs of being drunk. Gordon 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 6$y 

scarcely noticed what was being done for him Even the fact the Ravelston had 
paid his fine failed to trouble him For the rest of that afternoon he lay in one of 
the armchairs m front of the fire, reading a detective story About the future he 
refused to think He grew sleepy very early At eight o’clock he went to bed in 
the spare bedroom and slept like a log for nine hours 

It was not till next morning that he began to think seriously about his 
situation He woke m the wide caressing bed, softer and warmer than any bed 
he had ever slept in, and began to grope about for his matches Then he 
remembered that m places like this you didn’t need matches to get a light, and 
felt for the electric switch that hung on a cord at the bedhead Soft light flooded 
the room There was a syphon of soda water on the bed-table Gordon 
discovered that even after thirty-six hours there was still a vile taste in his 
mouth He had a drmk and looked about him 

It was a queer feeling, lying there in somebody else’s pyjamas m somebody 
else’s bed He felt that he had no business there-that this wasn’t the sort of 
place where he belonged There was a sense of guilt m lying here m luxury 
when he was ruined and hadn’t a penny m the world For he was ruined right 
enough, there was no doubt about that He seemed to know with perfect 
certainty that his job was lost God knew what was going to happen next The 
memory of that stupid dull debauch rolled back upon him with beastly 
vividness He could recall everything, from his first pmk gm before he started 
out to Dora’s peach-coloured garters He squirmed when he thought of Dora 
Why does one do these things’ Money again, always money 1 The rich don’t 
behave like that The rich are graceful even in their vices But if you have no 
money you don’t even know how to spend it when you get it You just splurge 
it frantically away, like a sailor m a bawdy-house his first night ashore. 

He had been m the clink, twelve hours He thought of the cold faecal stench 
of that cell at the police court A foretaste of future days And everyone would 
know that he had been in the clink With luck it might be kept from Aunt 
Angela and Uncle Walter, but Julia and Rosemary probably knew already 
With Rosemary it didn’t matter so much, but Julia would be ashamed and 
miserable He thought of Julia Her long thm back as she bent over the tea- 
caddy, her good, goose-like, defeated face She had never lived. From 
childhood she had been sacrificed to him- to Gordon, to ‘the boy’ It might be 
a hundred quid he had ‘borrowed’ from her in all these years, and then even 
five quid he couldn’t spare her Five quid he had set aside for her, and then 
spent it on a tart 1 

He turned out the light and lay on his back, wide awake At this moment he 
saw himself with frightful clarity He took a sort of inventory of himself and his 
possessions Gordon Comstock, last of the Comstocks, thirty years old, with 
twenty-six teeth left; with no money and no job; in borrowed pyjamas in a 
borrowed bed; with nothing before him except cadging and destitution, and 
nothing behind him except squalid fooleries. His total wealth a puny body and 
two cardboard suitcases full of worn-out clothes. 

At seven Ravelston was awakened by a tap on bis door. He rolled over and 
said $leep&y,- # Hullo?’ Gordon Came m, a dishevelled figure almost lost m the 



698 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

borrowed silk pyjamas Ravelston roused himself, yawning Theoretically he 
got up at the proletarian hour of seven Actually he seldom stirred until Mrs 
Beaver, the charwoman, arrived at eight Gordon pushed the hair out of his 
eyes and sat down on the foot of Ravelston’s bed 

£ I say, Ravelston, this is bloody I’ve been thinking things over There’s 
going to be hell to pay ’ 

‘What?’ 

‘I shall lose my job McKechme can’t keep me on after I’ve been m the clink 
Besides, I ought to have been at work yesterday Probably the shop wasn’t 
opened all day ’ 

Ravelston yawned ‘It’ll be all right, I think That fat chap-what’s his 
name? Flaxman-rang McKechme up and told him you were down with flu 
He made it pretty convincing He said your temperature was a hundred and 
three Of course your landlady knows But I don’t suppose she’d tell 
McKechme ’ 

‘But suppose it’s got into the papers 1 ’ 

‘Oh, lord 1 I suppose that might happen The char brings the papers up at 
eight But do they report drunk cases? Surely not?’ 

Mrs Beaver brought the Telegraph and the Herald Ravelston sent her out 
for the Mail and the Express They searched hurriedly through the police- 
court news Thank God 1 it hadn’t ‘got into the papers’ after all There was no 
reason why it should, as a matter of fact It was not as if Gordon had been a 
racing motorist or a professional footballer Feeling better, Gordon managed 
to eat some breakfast, and after breakfast Ravelston went out It was agreed 
that he should go up to the shop, see Mr McKechme, give him further details 
of Gordon’s illness, and find out how the land lay It seemed quite natural to 
Ravelston to waste several days in getting Gordon out of his scrape All the 
morning Gordon hung about the flat, restless and out of sorts, smoking 
cigarettes m an endless chain Now that he was alone, hope had deserted him 
He knew by profound instinct that Mr McKechme would have heard about his 
arrest It wasn’t the kind of thing you could keep dark He had lost his job, and 
that was all about it 

He lounged across to the window and looked out, A desolate day, the 
whitey-grey sky looked as if it could never be blue again* the naked trees wept 
slowly into the gutters Down a neighbouring street the cry of the coal-man 
echoed mournfully. Only a fortnight to Christmas now. Jolly to be out of work 
at this time of year 1 But the thought, instead of frightening him, merely bored 
him. The peculiar lethargic feeling, the stuffy heaviness behind the eyes, that 
one has. after a fit of drunkenness, seemed to have settled upon him 
permanently The prospect of searchmg for another >job bored him even more 
than the prospect of poverty. Besides, he would never find another job There 
are no. jobs to be had nowadays He was going down, down into the sub- world 
of the dhen^loyed-down, down into God knew what workhouse depths of 
dirt and hunger and futility And chiefly he was. anxious to get it over with as 
little fisss iurf effort as possible 

Eastern came back at about one o’clock He pulled his gloves off and threw 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 699 

them into a chair He looked tired and depressed Gordon saw at a glance that 
the game was up 

‘He’s heard, of course?’ he said 
‘Everything, I’m afraid ’ 

‘How? I suppose that cow of a Wisbeach woman went and sneaked to him?’ 
‘No It was m the paper after all The local paper He got it out of that ’ 
‘Oh, hell 1 I’d forgotten that ’ 

Ravelston produced from his coat pocket a folded copy of a bi-weekly paper 
It was one that they took m at the shop because Mr McKechme advertised m 
it- Gordon had forgotten that He opened it Gosh' What a splash r It was all 
over the middle page 


bookseller’s assistant fined 
magistrate’s severe stricture 
‘disgraceful fracas’ 

There were nearly two columns of it Gordon had never been so famous 
before and never would be again They must have been very hard up for a bit of 
news But these local papers have a curious notion of patriotism They are so 
avid for local news that a bicycle-accident in the Harrow Road will occupy 
more space than a European crisis, and such items of news as ‘Hampstead Man 
on Murder Charge’ or ‘Dismembered Baby m Cellar m Camberwell’ are 
displayed with positive pride 

Ravelston described his interview with Mr McKechme Mr McKechme, it 
seemed, was tom between his rage against Gordon and his desire not to offend 
such a good customer as Ravelston But of course, after such a thing like that, 
you could hardly expect him to take Gordon back These scandals were bad for 
trade, and besides, he was justly angry at the lies Flaxman had told him over 
the phone But he was angriest of all at the thought of his assistant being drunk 
and disorderly Ravelston said that the drunkenness seemed to anger him m a 
way that was peculiar He gave the impression that he would almost have 
preferred Gordon to pmch money out of the till Of course, he was a teetotaller 
himself Gordon had sometimes wondered whether he wasn’t also a secret 
drinker, in the traditional Scottish style His nose was certainly very red. But 
perhaps it was snuff that did it Anyway, that was that Gordon was in the 
soup, full fathom five 

‘I suppose the Wisbeach will stick to my clothes and things,’ he said, ‘I’m 
not going round there to fetch them Besides, I owe her a week’s rent,’ 

‘Oh, don’t worry about that I’ll see to your rent and everything,’ 

‘My dear chap, I can’t let you pay my rent 1 ’ 

‘Oh, dash it!’ Raveiston’s face grew faintly pink He looked miserably into 
the distance, and then said what he had to say all in a sudden burst: ‘Look here, 
Gordon, we must get this settled. You’re just got to stay here till this business 
has blown over I’H see you through* about money and all that. You needn’t 
think you’re being a nuisance, because you’re not And anyway, it’s only tih 
you get another job,*’ 



joo Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

Gordon moved moodily away from him, his hands in his pockets He had 
foreseen all this, of course He knew that he ought to refuse, he wanted to 
refuse, and yet he had not quite the courage 

‘I’m not going to sponge on you like that,’ he said sulkily 

‘Don’t use such expressions, for God’s sake* Besides, where could you go if 
you didn’t stay here?’ 

‘I don’t know-mto the gutter, I suppose It’s where I belong The sooner I 
get there the better ’ 

‘Rot 1 You’re going to stay here till you’ve found another job ’ 

‘But there isn’t a job in the world It might be a year before I found a job I 
don’t want a job ’ 

‘You mustn’t talk like that You’ll find a job right enough Something’s 
bound to turn up And for God’s sake don’t talk about sponging on me It’s only 
an arrangement between friends If you really want to, you can pay it all back 
when you’ve got the money ’ 

‘Yes -when^ 

But in the end he let himself be persuaded He had known that he would let 
himself be persuaded He stayed on at the flat, and allowed Ravelston to go 
round to Willowbed Road and pay his rent and recover his two cardboard 
suitcases, he even allowed Ravelston to ‘lend’ him a further two pounds for 
current expenses His heart sickened while he did it He was living on 
Ravelston-sponging on Ravelston How could there ever be a real friendship 
between them again? Besides, in his heart he didn’t want to be helped He only 
wanted to be left alone He was headed for the gutter, better to reach the gutter 
quickly and get it over Yet for the time being he stayed, simply because he 
lacked the courage to do otherwise 

But as for this busmess of getting a job, it was hopeless from the start Even 
Ravelston, though rich, could not manufacture jobs out of nothing Gordon 
knew beforehand that there were no jobs going begging m the book trade 
During the next three days he wore his shoes out traipsing from bookseller to 
bookseller At shop after shop he set his teeth, marched in, demanded to see 
the manager, and three minutes later marched out again with his nose m the 
air The answer was always the same-no jobs vacant. A few booksellers were 
taking on an extra man for the Christmas rush, but Gordon was not the type 
they were looking for He was neither smart nor servile, he wore shabby 
clothes and spoke with the accent of a gentleman Besides, a few questions 
always brought it out that he had been sacked from his last job for 
drunkenness After only three days he gave it up He knew it was no use It was 
only to please Ravelston that he had even been pretending to look for work 

In the evening he trailed back to the fiat, footsore and with his nerves on 
edge from a senes of snubs. He was making all his journeys on foot, to 
economize Ravelston’s two pounds When he got back Ravelston had just 
come up from theoflfice and was sitting in one of the armchairs in front of the 
Aire,* with some long galley-proofs over his knee He looked up as Gordon came 
Jm.* < - 

luck?’ he said as usual 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying yoi 

Gordon did not answer If he had answered it would have been with a stream 
of obscenities Without even looking at Ravelston he went straight into his 
bedroom, kicked off his shoes, and flung himself on the bed He hated himself 
at this moment Why had he come back^ What right had he to come back and 
sponge on Ravelston when he hadn’t even the intention of looking for a job any 
longer^ He ought to have stayed out m the streets, slept in Trafalgar Square, 
begged-anythmg But he hadn’t the guts to face the streets as yet The 
prospect of warmth and shelter had tugged him back He lay with his hands 
beneath his head, m a mixture of apathy and self-hatred After about half an 
hour he heard the door-bell ring and Ravelston get up to answer it It was that 
bitch Hermione Slater, presumably Ravelston had introduced Gordon to 
Hermione a couple of days ago, and she had treated him like dirt But a 
moment later there was a knock at the bedroom door 

‘What is iP’ said Gordon 

‘Somebody’s come to see you,’ said Ravelston 

‘To see me 

‘Yes Come on into the other room ’ 

Gordon swore and rolled sluggishly off the bed When he got to the other 
room he found that the visitor was Rosemary He had been half expecting her, 
of course, but it wearied him to see her He knew why she had come, to 
sympathize with him, to pity him, to reproach him-it was all the same In his 
despondent, bored mood he did not want to make the effort of talking to her 
All he wanted was to be left alone But Ravelston was glad to see her He had 
taken a liking to her in their single meetmg and thought she might cheer 
Gordon up He made a transparent pretext to go downstairs to the office, 
leaving the two of them together 

They were alone, but Gordon made no move to embrace her He was 
standing in front of the fire, round-shouldered, his hands m his coat pockets, 
his feet thrust into a pair of Ravelston’ s slippers which were much too big for 
him She came rather hesitantly towards him, not yet taking off her hat or her 
coat with the lamb-skin collar It hurt her to see him In less than a week his 
appearance had deteriorated strangely Already he had that unmistakable, 
seedy, lounging look of a man who is out of work His face seemed to have 
grown thinner, and there were rings round his eyes Also it was obvious that he 
had not shaved that day 

She laid her hand on his arm, rather awkwardly, as a woman does when it is 
she who has to make the first embrace 

‘Gordon-’ 

‘WelP’ 

He said it almost sulkily The next moment she was in his arms But it was 
she who had made the first movement, not he. Her head was on his breast, and 
behold! she was struggling with all her might against the tears that almost 
overwhelmed her. It bored Gordon dreadfully He seemed so often to reduce 
her to tears 1 And he didn’t want to be cried over; he only wanted to be left 
alone-alone to sulk and despair. As he held her there, one hand mechanically 
caressing her shoulder, his mam feeling was boredom She had made things 



jo 2 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

more diffi cult for him by coming here Ahead of him were dirt, cold, hunger, 
the streets, the workhouse, and the jail It was against that that he had got to 
steel himself And he could steel himself, if only she would leave him alone and 
not come plaguing him with these irrelevant emotions 

He pushed her a little way from him She had recovered herself quickly, as 
she always did 

‘Gordon, my dear one* Oh, I’m so sorry, so sorry ' 5 

‘Sorry about what ? 5 

‘You losing your job and everything You look so unhappy 5 

‘I 5 m not unhappy Don’t pity me, for God’s sake 5 

He disengaged himself from her arms She pulled her hat off and threw it 
into a chair She had come here with something definite to say It was 
something she had refrained from saying all these years-somethmg that it had 
seemed to her a point of chivalry not to say But now it had got to be said, and 
she would come straight out with it It was not m her nature to beat about the 
bush 

‘Gordon, will you do something to please me ? 5 

‘What ? 5 

‘Will you go back to the New Albion ? 5 

So that was it' Of course he had foreseen it She was going to start nagging at 
him like all the others She was going to add herself to the band of people who 
worried him and badgered him to ‘get on 5 But what else could you expect? It 
was what any woman would say The marvel was that she had never said it 
before Go back to the New Albion' It had been the sole significant action of 
his life, leaving the New Albion It was his religion, you might say, to keep out 
of that filthy money-world Yet at this moment he could not remember with 
any clarity the motives for which he had left the New Albion All he knew was 
that he would never go back, not if the skies fell, and that the argument he 
foresaw bored him in advance 

He shrugged his shoulders and looked away ‘The New Albion wouldn’t 
take me back,’ he said shortly 

‘Yes, they would You remember what Mr Erskine said It’s not so long 
ago-only two years And they’re always on the look-out for goodnopywriters 
Everyone at the office says so. I’m sure they’d give you a job if you went and 
asked them And they’d pay you at least four pounds a week,’ 

‘Four pounds a weekl Splendid! I could afford to keep an aspidistra on that, 
couldn’t I?’ 

‘No, Gordon, don’t joke about it now 5 

‘I’m not joking I’m serious ’ 

‘You mean you won’t go back to them-not even if they offered you a job ? 5 

‘Not in a thousand years. Not if they paid me fifty pounds a week 5 
‘But why? Why? s 
* ‘f Ve told you why , 5 he said wearily 

<• She lookedathim helplessly. After all, it was no use. There was this money- 
jtesiaess s^mdhig in the way— these meaningless scruples which she had never 
but which she had accepted merely because they were his. She felt 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying jo 3 

all the impotence, the resentment of a woman who sees an abstract idea 
triumphing over common sense How maddening it was, that he should let 
himself be pushed into the gutter by a thing like that' She said almost angrily 
‘I don’t understand you, Gordon, I really don’t Here you are out of work, 
you may be starving in a little while for all you know, and yet when there’s a 
good job which you can have almost for the asking, you won’t take it ’ 

‘No, you’re quite right I won’t ’ 

‘But you must have some kind of job, mustn’t you?’ 

‘A job, but not a good job I’ve explained that God knows how often I dare 
say I’ll get a job of sorts sooner or later The same kmd of job as I had before ’ 
‘But I don’t believe you’re even trying to get a job, are you?’ 

‘Yes, I am I’ve been out all today seeing booksellers ’ 

‘And you didn’t even shave this morning 1 ’ she said, changing her ground 
with feminine swiftness 

He felt his chin ‘I don’t believe I did, as a matter of fact ’ 

‘And then you expect people to give you a job’ Oh, Gordon’’ 

‘Oh, well, what does it matter? It’s too much fag to shave every day ’ 
‘You’re letting yourself go to pieces,’ she said bitterly ‘You don’t seem to 
want to make any effort You want to sink-just sink)' 

‘I don’t know-perhaps I’d sooner sink than rise ’ 

There were further arguments It was the first time she had ever spoken to 
him like this Once again the tears came into her eyes, and once again she 
fought them back She had come here swearing to herself that she would not 
cry The dreadful thing was that her tears, instead of distressing him, merely 
bored him It was as though he could not care, and yet at his very centre there 
was an inner heart that cared because he could not care If only she would leave 
him alone 1 Alone, alone 1 Free from the nagging consciousness of his failure, 
free to sink, as she had said, down, down into quiet worlds where money and 
effort and moral obligation did not exist Finally he got away from her and 
went back to the spare bedroom. It was definitely a quarrel- the first really 
deadly quarrel they had ever had Whether it was to be final he did not know. 
Nor did he care, at this moment He locked the door behind him and lay on the 
bed smoking a cigarette He must get out of this place, and quickly’ Tomorrow 
morning he would clear out No more sponging on Ravelston 1 No more 
blackmail to the gods of decency’ Down, down, into the mud-down to the 
streets, the workhouse, and the jail It was only there that he could be at peace 
Ravelston came upstairs to find Rosemary alone and on the point of 
departure. She said good-bye and then suddenly turned to him and laid her 
hand on his arm She felt that she knew him well enough now to take him into 
her confidence 

‘Mr Ravelston, please-aa# you try and persuade Gordon to get a job?’ 

‘I’ll do what I can Of course it’s always difficult But I expect we’ll find him 
a job of sorts before long,’ 

‘It’s so dreadful to see him like this! He goes absolutely to pieces. And all die 
time, you see, there’s a job he could quite easily get if he wanted it-a really gaud 
job. It’s not that he can’t, it’s simply that he won’t * 



704 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

She explained about the New Albion Ravelston rubbed his nose 

‘Yes As a matter of fact I’ve heard all about that We talked it over when he 
left the New Albion ’ 

‘But you don’t think he was right to leave them?’ she said, promptly divining 
that Ravelston did think Gordon right 

‘Well- 1 grant you it wasn’t very wise But there’s a certain amount of truth 
in what he says Capitalism’s corrupt and we ought to keep outside lt-that’s 
his idea It’s not practicable, but in a way it’s sound ’ 

‘Oh, I dare say it’s all right as a theory 1 But when he’s out of work and when 
he could get this job if he chose to ask for it-surely you don’t think he’s right to 
refuse?’ 

‘Not from a common-sense point of view But in principle-well, yes ’ 

‘Oh, in principle 1 We can’t afford principles, people like us That’s what 
Gordon doesn’t seem to understand ’ 

Gordon did not leave the flat next morning One resolves to do’these things, 
one wants to do them, but when the time comes, in the cold mornmg light, they 
somehow don’t get done He would stay just one day more he told himself, and 
then again it was ‘just one day more’, until five whole days had passed since 
Rosemary’s visit, and he was still lurkmg there, living on Ravelston, with not 
even a flicker of a job m sight He still made some pretence of searching for 
work, but he only did it to save his face He would go out and loaf for hours m 
public libraries, and then come home to lie on the bed m the spare bedroom, 
dressed except for his shoes, smoking endless cigarettes And for all that inertia 
and the fear of the streets still held him there, those five days were awful, 
damnable, unspeakable There is nothing more dreadful in the world than to 
live m somebody else’s house, eating his bread and doing nothing m return for 
it And perhaps it is worst of all when your benefactor won’t for a moment 
admit that he is your benefactor Nothing could have exceeded Ravelston’s 
delicacy He would have perished rather than admit that Gordon was sponging 
on him He had paid Gordon’s fine, he had paid his arrears of rent, he had kept 
him for a week, and he had ‘lent’ him two pounds on top of that, but it was 
nothing, it was a mere arrangement between friends, Gordon would do the 
same for him another time From time to time Gordon made ieebleeiSorts to 
escape, which always ended m the same way. 

‘Look here, Ravelston, I can’t stay here any longer You’ve kept me long 
enough I’m going to clear out tomorrow morning 5 

‘But my dear old chap 1 Do be sensible You haven’t-’ But no' Not even now, 
whfen Gordon was openly on the rocks, could Ravelston say, ‘You haven’t got 
any money.’ One can’t say things like that He compromised ‘Where are you 
going to live, anyway?’ 

‘God knows- 1 don’t care. There are common lodging-houses and places 
I’ve got a few bob left? 

‘Don’t be such an ass. .You’d much better stay here till you’ve found a job ’ 

J Bmi%might be months, I fell you I can’t live on you like this ’ 

» ‘Rot, my dear chap! I ike having you here ’ 

course, in has inmost heart, he didn’t really like having Gordon there. 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 705 

How should he-* It was an impossible situation There was a tension between 
them all the time It is always so when one person is living on another 
However delicately disguised, charity is still horrible, there is a malaise, almost 
a secret hatred, between the giver and the receiver Gordon knew that his 
friendship with Ravelston would never be the same again Whatever happened 
afterwards, the memory of this evil time would be between them The feeling 
of his dependent position, of being in the way, unwanted, a nuisance, was with 
him night and day At meals he would scarcely eat, he would not smoke 
Ravelston’s cigarettes, but bought himself cigarettes out of his few remaining 
shillings He would not even light the gas-fire m his bedroom He would have 
made himself invisible if he could Every day, of course, people were coming 
and going at the flat and at the office All of them saw Gordon and grasped his 
status Another of Ravelston’s pet scroungers, they all said He even detected a 
gleam of professional jealousy m one or two of the hangers-on of Antichrist 
Three times during that week Hermione Slater came After his first encounter 
with her he fled from the flat as soon as she appeared, on one occasion, when 
she came at night, he had to stay out of doors till after midnight Mrs Beaver, 
the charwoman, had also ‘seen through’ Gordon She knew his type He was 
another of those good-for-nothmg young ‘writing gentlemen’ who sponged on 
poor Mr Ravelston So in none too subtle ways she made things uncomfortable 
for Gordon Her favourite trick was to rout him out with broom and 
pan-‘Now, Mr Comstock, I’ve got to do this room out, if you please’ -from 
whichever room he had settled down in 

But m the end, unexpectedly and through no effort of his own, Gordon did 
get a job One morning a letter came for Ravelston from Mr McKechme Mr 
McKechme had relented-not to the extent of taking Gordon back, of course, 
but to the extent of helping him find another job He said that a Mr 
Cheeseman, a bookseller in Lambeth, was looking for an assistant From what 
he said it was evident that Gordon could get the job if he applied for it, it was 
equally evident that there was some snag about the job Gordon had vaguely 
heard of Mr Cheeseman-m the book trade everybody knows everybody else 
In his heart the news bored him He didn’t really want this job He didn’t want 
ever to work again, all he wanted was to sink, sink, effortless, down into the 
mud But he couldn’t disappoint Ravelston after all Ravelston had done for 
him So the same morning he went down to Lambeth to inquire about the job 

The shop was in the desolate stretch of road south of Waterloo Bridge It 
was a poky, mean-looking shop, and the name over it, in faded gilt, was not 
Cheeseman but Eldndge In the window, however, there were some valuable 
calf folios, and some sixteenth-century maps which Gordon thought must be 
worth money. Evidently Mr Cheeseman specialized m ‘rare’ books, Gordon 
plucked up Ins courage and went in. 

As the door-bell ping’d, a tiny, evil-looking creature, with a sharp nose and 
heavy black eyebrows, emerged from the office behind the shop. He looked up 
at Gordon with a kind of nosy malice. When he spoke it was in m 
extraordinary clipped manner, as though he were biting each word in half 
before it escaped from him ‘Ot c’n I do fyerl’-that approximately was what it 



jo6 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

sounded like Gordon explained why he had come Mr Cheeseman shot a 
meaning glance at him and answered m the same clipped manner as before 

‘Oh, eh> Comstock, eh’ Come ’is way Got mi office back here Bm ’specting 
you 5 

Gordon followed him Mr Cheeseman was a rather sinister little man, 
almost small enough to be called a dwarf, with very black hair, and slightly 
deformed As a rule a dwarf, when malformed, has a full-sized torso and 
practically no legs With Mr Cheeseman it was the other way about His legs 
were normal length, but the top half of his body was so short that his buttocks 
seemed to sprout almost immediately below his shoulder blades This gave 
him, in walking, a resemblance to a pair of scissors He had the powerful bony 
shoulders of the dwarf, the large ugly hands, and the sharp nosing movements 
of the head His clothes had that peculiar hardened, shmy texture of clothes 
that are very old and very dirty They were just going into the office when the 
door-bell ping’d again, and a customer came in, holding out a book from the 
sixpenny box outside and half a crown Mr Cheeseman did not take the change 
out of the till-apparently there was no till-but produced a very greasy wash- 
leather purse from some secret place under his waistcoat He handled the 
purse, which was almost lost m his big hands, m a peculiarly secretive way, as 
though to hide it from sight 

C I like keep mi money 1’ mi pocket,’ he explained, with an upward glance, as 
they went into the office 

It was apparent that Mr Cheeseman clipped his words from a notion that 
words cost money and ought not to be wasted In the office they had a talk, and 
Mr Cheeseman extorted from Gordon the confession that he had been sacked 
for drunkenness As a matter of fact he knew all about this already He had 
heard about Gordon from Mr McKechme, whom he had met at an auction a 
few days earlier He had pncked up his ears when he heard the story, for he was 
on the look-out for an assistant, and clearly an assistant who had been sacked 
for drunkenness would come at reduced wages Gordon saw that his 
drunkenness was going to be used as a weapon against him Yet Mr 
Cheeseman did not seem absolutely unfriendly He seemed to be the kind of 
person who will cheat you if he can, and bully you if you give him the chance, 
but who will also regard you with a contemptuous good-humour He took 
Gordon into his confidence, talked of conditions in the trade, and boasted with 
much chuckling of his own astuteness He had a peculiar chuckle, his mouth 
curving upwards at the corners and his large nose seeming about to disappear 
into it. 

Recently, he told Gordon, he had had an idea for a profitable side-lme He 
was going to start a twopenny library, but it would have to be quite separate 
from the shop, because anything so low-class would frighten away the book- 
lovers who came to the shop in search of ‘rare’ books He had taken premises a 
little distance away, and m the lunch-hour he took Gordon to see them They 
were farther down the dreary street, between a flyblown ham-and-beef shop 
and a smartish undertaker The ads m the undertaker’s window caught 
Gordon’s eye. It seems you can get underground for as little as two pounds ten 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying joy 

nowadays You can even get buried on the hire-purchase There was also an ad 
for cremations-‘Reverent, Sanitary, and Inexpensive * 

The premises consisted of a single narrow room-a mere pipe of a room with 
a window as wide as itself, furnished with a cheap desk, one chair, and a card 
index The new-pamted shelves were ready and empty This was not, Gordon 
saw at a glance, going to be the kind of library that he had presided over at 
McKechme’s McKechme’s library had been comparatively highbrow It had 
dredged no deeper than Dell, and it even had books by Lawrence and Huxley 
But this was one of those cheap and evil little libraries (‘mushroom libraries’, 
they are called) which are springing up all over London and are deliberately 
aimed at the uneducated In libraries like these there is not a single book that is 
ever mentioned in the reviews or that any civilized person has ever heard of 
The books are published by special low-class firms and turned out by 
wretched hacks at the rate of four a year, as mechanically as sausages and with 
much less skill In effect they are merely fourpenny novelettes disguised as 
novels, and they only cost the library-proprietor one and eightpence a volume 
Mr Cheeseman explained that he had not ordered the books yet. He spoke of 
‘ordering the books’ as one might speak of ordering a ton of coals He was 
going to start with five hundred assorted titles, he said The shelves were 
already marked off into sections-‘Sex’, ‘Crime’, ‘Wild West’, and so forth 

He offered Gordon the job It was very simple All you had to do was to 
remain there ten hours a day, hand out the book, take the money, and choke off 
the more obvious book-pinchers The pay, he added with a measuring, side- 
long glance, was thirty shillings a week 

Gordon accepted promptly Mr Cheeseman was perhaps faintly disap- 
pointed He had expected an argument, and would have enjoyed crushing 
Gordon by reminding him that beggars can’t be choosers But Gordon was 
satisfied The job would do There was no trouble about a job like this, no room 
for ambition, no effort, no hope Ten bob less-ten bob nearer the mud It was 
what he wanted 

He ‘borrowed’ another two pounds from Ravelston and took a furnished 
bed-sitting room, eight bob a week, m a filthy alley parallel to Lambeth Cut 
Mr Cheeseman ordered the five hundred assorted titles, and Gordon started 
work on the twentieth of December This, as it happened, was his thirtieth 
birthday 



10 


Under ground, under ground 1 Down m the safe soft womb of earth, where 
there is no getting of jobs or losing of jobs, no relatives or friends to plague you, 
no hope, fear, ambition, honour, duty-no duns of any kind That was where he 
wished to be 

Yet it was not death, actual physical death, that he wished for It was a queer 
feeling that he had It had been with him ever since that morning when he had 
woken up in the police cell The evil, mutinous mood that comes after 
drunkenness seemed to have set into a habit That drunken night had marked a 
period m his life It had dragged him downward with strange suddenness 
Before, he had fought against the money-code, and yet he had clung to his 
wretched remnant of decency But now it was precisely from decency that he 
wanted to escape He wanted to go down, deep down, into some world where 
decency no longer mattered, to cut the strings of his self-respect, to submerge 
himself-to sink , as Rosemary had said It was all bound up m his mind with the 
thought of being under ground He liked to think about the lost people, the 
under-ground people tramps, beggars, criminals, prostitutes It is a good 
world that they inhabit, down there in their frowzy kips and spikes He liked to 
think that beneath the world of money there is that great sluttish underworld 
where failure and success have no meaning, a sort of kingdom of ghosts where 
all are equal That was where he wished to be, down m the ghost-kingdom, 
below ambition It comforted him somehow to think of the smoke-dim slums of 
South London sprawling on and on, a huge graceless wilderness where you 
could lose yourself for ever 

And m a way this job was what he wanted, at any rate, it was something near 
what he wanted Down there m Lambeth, in winter, m the murky streets 
where the sepia-shadowed faces of tea-drunkards drifted through the mist, 
you had a submerged feeling Down here you had no contact with money or 
with culture No highbrow customers to whom you had to act the highbrow, 
no one who was capable of asking you, m that prying way that prosperous 
people have, "What are you, with your brains and education, doing in a job like 
this?’ You were just part of the slum, and, like all slum-dwellers, taken for 
granted. The youths and girls and draggled middle-aged women who came to 
the library scarcely even spotted the fact that Gordon was an educated man 
He was just "the bloke at the library’, and practically one of themselves 

The job itself, of course, was of inconceivable futility You just sat there, ten 
hours a 4ay, six hours on Thursdays, handing out books, registering them, and 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 709 

receiving twopences Between whiles there was nothing to do except read 
There was nothing worth watching m the desolate street outside The 
principal event of the day was when the hearse drove up to the undertaker's 
establishment next door This had a faint interest for Gordon, because the dye 
was wearing off one of the horses and it was assuming by degrees a curious 
purplish-brown shade Much of the time, when no customers came, he spent 
reading the yellow-jacketed trash that the library contained Books of that type 
you could read at the rate of one an hour And they were the kind of books that 
suited him nowadays It is real ‘escape literature’, that stuff m the twopenny 
libraries Nothing has ever been devised that puts less strain on the 
intelligence, even a film, by comparison, demands a certain effort And so 
when a customer demanded a book of this category or that, whether it was 
‘Sex’ or ‘Crime’ or ‘Wild West’ or ‘Romance’ (always with the accent on the 6 ) 
Gordon was ready with expert advice 
Mr Cheeseman was not a bad person to work for, so long as you understood 
that if you worked till the Day of Judgement you would never get a rise of 
wages Needless to say, he suspected Gordon of pinching the till-money After 
a week or two he devised a new system of booking, by which he could tell how 
many books had been taken out and check this with the day’s takings But it 
was still (he reflected) m Gordon’s power to issue books and make no record of 
them, and so the possibility that Gordon might be cheating him of sixpence or 
even a shilling a day continued to trouble him, like the pea under the princess’s 
mattress Yet he was not absolutely unlikeable, m his sinister, dwarfish way In 
the evenings, after he had shut the shop, when he came along to the library to 
collect the day’s takings, he would stay talking to Gordon for a while and 
recounting with nosy chuckles any particularly astute swindles that he had 
worked lately From these conversations Gordon pieced together Mr 
Cheeseman’s history He had been brought up in the old-clothes trade, which 
was his spiritual vocation, so to speak, and had mhented the bookshop from an 
uncle three years ago At that time it was one of those dreadful bookshops in 
which there are not even any shelves, in which the books he about m 
monstrous dusty piles with no attempt at classification It was frequented to 
some extent by book-collectors, because there was occasionally a valuable 
book among the piles of rubbish, but mainly it kept going by selling second- 
hand paper-covered thrillers at twopence each Over this dustheap Mr 
Cheeseman had presided, at first, with intense disgust He loathed books and 
had not yet grasped that there was money to be made out of them He was still 
keeping his old-clothes shop going by means of a deputy, and intended to 
return to it as soon as he could get a good offer for the bookshop But presently 
it was borne in upon him that books, properly handled, are worth money As 
soon as he had made this discovery he developed as astonishing flair for book- 
dealing, Withm two years he had worked his shop up till it was one of the best 
‘rare’ bookshops of its size m London To him a book was as purely an article 
of merchandise as a pair of second-hand trousers. He had never in his life read 
a book himself, nor could he conceive why anyone should want to do so His 
attitude towards the eoflecGors who pored so lovingly over his rare editions was 



jio Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

that of a sexually cold prostitute towards her clientele Yet he seemed to know 
by the mere feel of a book whether it was valuable or not His head was a 
perfect mine of auction-records and first-edition dates, and he had a 
marvellous nose for a bargain His favourite way of acquiring stock was to buy 
up the libraries of people who had just died, especially clergymen Whenever a 
clergyman died Mr Cheeseman was on the spot with the promptness of a 
vulture Clergymen, he explained to Gordon, so often have good libraries and 
ignorant widows He lived over the shop, was unmarried, of course, and had no 
amusements and seemingly no friends Gordon used sometimes to wonder 
what Mr Cheeseman did with himself in the evenings, when he was not out 
snooping after bargains He had a mental picture of Mr Cheeseman sitting m a 
double-locked room with the shutters over the windows, counting piles of 
half-crowns and bundles of pound notes which he stowed carefully away in 
cigarette-tms 

Mr Cheeseman bullied Gordon and was on the look-out for an excuse to 
dock his wages, yet he did not bear him any particular ill-will Sometimes m 
the evening when he came to the library he would produce a greasy packet of 
Smith’s Potato Crisps from his pocket, and, holding it out, say m his clipped 
style 

‘Has some chips^ 1 ’ 

The packet was always grasped so firmly m his large hand that it was 
impossible to extract more than two or three chips But he meant it as a 
friendly gesture 

As for the place where Gordon lived, in Brewer’s Yard, parallel to Lambeth 
Cut on the south side, it was a filthy kip His bed-sitting room was eight 
shillings a week and was just under the roof With its sloping ceilmg-it was a 
room shaped like a wedge of cheese-and its skylight window, it was the nearest 
thing to the proverbial poet’s garret that he had ever lived m There was a 
large, low, broken-backed bed with a ragged patchwork quilt and sheets that 
were changed once fortmghtly, a deal table ringed by dynasties of teapots, a 
rickety kitchen chair, a tin basin for washing m, a gas-ring in the fender The 
bare floorboards had never been stained but were dark with dirt In the cracks 
m the pmk wallpaper dwelt multitudes of bugs; however, this was winter and 
they were torpid unless you over- warmed the room You were expected to 
make your own bed, Mrs Meakin, the landlady, theoretically ‘did out’ the 
rooms daily, but four days out of five she found the stairs too much for her 
Nearly all the lodgers cooked their own squalid meals in their bedrooms 
There was no gas-stove, of course, just the gas-rmg m the fender, and, down 
two flights of stairs, a large evil-smelhng sink which was common to the whole 
house 

In the garret adjoining Gordon’s there lived a tall handsome old woman who 
was not quite right in the head and whose face was often as black as a Negro’s 
from dirt. Gordon could never make out where the dirt came from It looked 
hke coal dust. The children of the neighbourhood used to shout ‘Blackie*’ after 
her a$ she stalked along the pavement like a tragedy queen, talking to herself 
Qm the floor below there was a woman with a baby which cried, cried 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying yn 

everlastingly, also a young couple who used to have frightful quarrels and 
frightful reconciliations which you could hear all over the house On the 
ground floor a house-pamter, his wife, and five children existed on the dole and 
an occasional odd )ob Mrs Meakin, the landlady, inhabited some burrow or 
other in the basement Gordon liked this house It was all so different from 
Mrs Wisbeach’s There was no mingy lower-middle-class decency here, no 
feeling of being spied upon and disapproved of So long as you paid your rent 
you could do almost exactly as you liked, come home drunk and crawl up the 
stairs, bring women m at all hours, lie in bed all day if you wanted to Mother 
Meakin was not the type to interfere She was a dishevelled, jelly-soft old 
creature with a figure like a cottage loaf People said that in her youth she had 
been no better than she ought, and probably it was true She had a loving 
manner towards anything in trousers Yet it seemed that traces of 
respectability lingered m her breast On the day when Gordon installed 
himself he heard her puffing and struggling up the stairs, evidently bearing 
some burden She knocked softly on the door with her knee, or the place where 
her knee ought to have been, and he let her m 

°Ere y’are, then , 5 she wheezed kindly as she came in with her arms full ‘I 
knew as ’ow you’d like this, I likes all my lodgers to feel comfortable-like 
Lemme put it on the table for you There 1 That makes the room like a bit more 
? ome-like, don’t it now’’ 

It was an aspidistra It gave him a bit of a twinge to see it Even here, m this 
final refuge' Hast thou found me, O mine enemy’ But it was a poor weedy 
specimen-mdeed, it was obviously dying 

In this place he could have been happy if only people would let him alone It 
was a place where you could be happy, m a sluttish way To spend your days m 
meaningless mechanical work, work that could be slovened through m a sort of 
coma, to come home and light the fire when you had any coal (there were 
sixpenny bags at the grocer’s) and get the stuffy little attic warm, to sit over a 
squalid meal of bacon, bread-and-marg and tea, cooked over the gas-ring, to 
lie on the frowzy bed, reading a thriller or doing the Bram Bnghteners in Tit 
Bits until the small hours, it was the kind of life he wanted All his habits had 
deteriorated rapidly He never shaved more than three times a week nowadays, 
and only washed the parts that showed There were good public baths near by, 
but he hardly went to them as often as once in a month He never made his bed 
properly, but just turned back the sheets, and never washed his few crocks till 
all of them had been used twice over There was a film of dust on everything 
In the fender there was always a greasy frying-pan and a couple of plates 
coated with the remnants of fried eggs One night the bugs came out of one of 
the cracks and marched across the ceiling two by two He lay on his bed, his 
hands under his head, watching them with interest. Without regret, almost 
intentionally, he was letting himself go to pieces At the bottom of all his 
feelings there was sulkiness a je m’en fous in the face of the world Life had 
beaten him, but you can still beat life by turning your face away. Better to smk 
than rise Down, down into the ghost-kingdom, the shadowy world where 
shame, effort, decency do not exist! 



ji2 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

To sink' How easy it ought to be, since there are so few competitors' But the 
strange thing is that often it is harder to sink than to rise There is always 
something that drags one upwards After all, one is never quite alone, there are 
always friends, lovers, relatives Everyone Gordon knew seemed to be writing 
him letters, pitying him or bullying him Aunt Angela had written, Uncle 
Walter had written, Rosemary had written over and over again, Ravelston had 
written, Julia had written Even Flaxman had sent a line to wish him luck 
Flaxman’s wife had forgiven him, and he was back at Peckham, m aspidistral 
bliss Gordon hated getting letters nowadays They were a link with that other 
world from which he was trying to escape 
Even Ravelston had turned against him That was after he had been to see 
Gordon m his new lodgings Until this visit he had not realized what kind of 
neighbourhood Gordon was living in As his taxi drew up at the comer, in the 
Waterloo Road, a horde of ragged shock-haired boys came swooping from 
nowhere, to fight round the taxi door like fish at a bait Three of them clung to 
the handle and hauled the door open simultaneously Their servile, dirty little 
faces, wild with hope, made him feel sick He flung some penmes among them 
and fled up the alley without looking at them again The narrow pavements 
were smeared with a quantity of dogs’ excrement that was surprising, seeing 
that there were no dogs m sight Down m the basement Mother Meakm was 
boiling a haddock, and you could smell it half-way up the stairs In the attic 
Ravelston sat on the rickety chair, with the ceiling sloping just behind his head 
The fire was out and there was no light m the room except four candles 
guttering in a saucer beside the aspidistra Gordon lay on the ragged bed, fully 
dressed but with no shoes on He had scarcely stirred when Ravelston came m 
He just lay there, flat on his back, sometimes smiling a little, as though there 
were some private joke between himself and the ceiling The room had already 
the stuffy sweetish smell of rooms that have been lived in a long time and never 
cleaned There were dirty crocks lying about in the fender 
‘Would you like a cup of tea? 5 Gordon said, without stirring 
‘No thanks awfully-no,’ said Ravelston, a little too hastily 
He had seen the brown-stained cups in the fender and the repulsive common 
sink downstairs. Gordon knew quite well why Ravelston refused the tea The 
whole atmosphere of this place had given Ravelston a kind of shock That 
awful mixed smell of slops and haddock on the stairs' He looked at Gordon, 
supine on the ragged bed And, dash it, Gordon was a gentleman! At another 
time he would have repudiated that thought, but m this atmosphere pious 
humbug was impossible. All the class-instincts which he believed himself not 
to possess rose in revolt It was dreadful to think of anyone with brains and 
refinement living in a place like this. He wanted to tell Gordon to get out of it, 
pull himself together, earn a decent income, and live like a gentleman But of 
course he didn’t say so You can’t say thmgs like that Gordon was aware of 
what was going car inside Ravelston’s head It amused him, rather He felt no 
gratitude towards Ravelston for coming here and seeing him; on the other 
hand, he was not ashamed of his surroundings as he would once have been 
There was a famt, amused malice m the way he spoke 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying ji g 

‘You think I'm a B F , of course/ he remarked to the ceiling 
‘No, I don’t Why should P' 

‘Yes, you do You think I'm a B F to stay m this filthy place instead of 
getting a proper job You think I ought to try for that job at the New Albion * 
‘No, dash it’ I never thought that I see your point absolutely I told you that 
before I think you’re perfectly right m principle ’ 

‘And you think principles are all right so long as one doesn’t go putting them 
into practice ’ 

‘No But the question always is, when is one putting them into practice' 1 ’ 
‘It’s quite simple I’ve made war on money This is where it’s led me,’ 
Ravelston rubbed his nose, then shifted uneasily on his chair 
‘The mistake you make, don’t you see, is in thinking one can live in a corrupt 
society without being corrupt oneself After all, what do you achieve by 
refusing to make money’ You’re trying to behave as though one could stand 
right outside our economic system But one can’t One’s got to change the 
system, or one changes nothing One can’t put things right m a hole-and- 
corner way, if you take my meaning ’ 

Gordon waved a foot at the buggy ceiling 
‘Of course this is a hole-and-corner, I admit ’ 

‘I didn’t mean that,’ said Ravelston, pained 

‘But let’s face facts You think I ought to be looking about for a good job, 
don’t you’’ 

‘It depends on the job I think you’re quite right not to sell yourself to that 
advertising agency But it does seem rather a pity that you should stay in that 
wretched job you’re m at present After all, you have got talents You ought to 
be using them somehow ’ 

‘There are my poems,’ said Gordon, smiling at his private joke 
Ravelston looked abashed This remark silenced him Of course, there were 
Gordon’s poems There was London Pleasures , for instance Ravelston knew, 
and Gordon knew, and each knew that the other knew, that London Pleasures 
would never be finished Never again, probably, would Gordon write a line of 
poetry, never, at least, while he remained m this vile place, this blind-alley job 
and this defeated mood He had finished with all that But this could not be 
said, as yet The pretence was still kept up that Gordon was a struggling 
poet-the conventional poet-m-garret 

It was not long before Ravelston rose to go This smelly place oppressed 
him, and it was increasingly obvious that Gordon did not want him here. He 
moved hesitantly towards the door, pulling on his gloves, then came back 
again, pulling off his left glove and flicking it agamst his leg 
‘Look here, Gordon, you won’t mmd my saying lt-this is a filthy place, you 
know This house, this street-everythmg ’ 

‘I know. It’s a pigsty. It suits me.* 

‘But do you have to live in a place like this?’ 

‘My dear chap, you know what my wages are Thirty bob a week 5 
‘Yes, but-! Surely there are better places? What rent are you paying?’ 
‘Eight bob.* 



J14 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

‘Eight bob? You could get a fairly decent unfurnished room for that 
Something a bit better than this, anyway Look here, why don’t you take an 
unfurnished place and let me lend you ten quid for furniture?’ 

‘“Lend” me ten quid' After all you’ve “lent” me already? Give me ten quid, 
you mean ’ 

Ravelston gazed unhappily at the wall Dash it, what a thing to say' He said 
flatly 

‘All right, if you like to put it like that Give you ten quid ’ 

‘But as it happens, you see, I don’t want it ’ 

‘But dash it all' You might as well have a decent place to live m ’ 

‘But I don’t want a decent place I want an indecent place This one, for 
instance ’ 

‘But why? Why?’ 

‘It’s suited to my station,’ said Gordon, turning his face to the wall 
A few days later Ravelston wrote him a long, diffident sort of letter It 
reiterated most of what he had said m their conversation Its general effect was 
that Ravelston saw Gordon’s point entirely, that there was a lot of truth in 
what Gordon said, that Gordon was absolutely right in principle, but-' It was 
the obvious, the inevitable ‘but’ Gordon did not answer It was several 
months before he saw Ravelston again Ravelston made various attempts to get 
in touch with him It was a curious fact-rather a shameful fact from a 
Socialist’s point of view-that the thought of Gordon, who had brains and was 
of gentle birth, lurking in that vile place and that almost menial job, worried 
him more than the thought of ten thousand unemployed in Middlesbrough 
Several times, in hope of cheering Gordon up, he wrote asking him to send 
contributions to Antichrist Gordon never answered The friendship was at an 
end, it seemed to him The evil time when he had lived on Ravelston had 
spoiled everything Chanty kills friendship 
And then there were Julia and Rosemary They differed from Ravelston m 
this, that they had no shyness about speaking their minds They did not say 
euphemistically that Gordon was ‘right m principle’, they knew that to refuse a 
‘good’ job can never be right Over and over again they besought him to go 
back to the New Albion The worst was that he had both of them m pursuit of 
him together Before this business they had never met, but now Rosemary had 
got to know Julia somehow They were m feminine league against him They 
used to get together and talk about the ‘maddening’ way m which Gordon was 
behaving It was the only thing they had m common, their feminine rage 
against his ‘maddening’ behaviour Simultaneously and one after the other, by 
letter and by word of mouth, they harried him It was unbearable 
Thank God, neither of them had seen his room at Mother Meakm’s yet 
Rosemary might have endured it, but the sight of that filthy attic would have 
been almost the death of Julia They had been round to see him at the library, 
Rosemary a number of times, Julia once, when she could make a pretext to get 
away from the teashop Even that was bad enough. It dismayed them to see 
what a mean, dreary little place the library was The job at McKechnie’s, 
though wretchedly paid, had not been the kind of job that you need actually be 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 715 

ashamed of It brought Gordon into touch with cultivated people, seeing that 
he was a ‘writer’ himself, it might conceivably ‘lead to something’ But here, m 
a street that was almost a slum, serving out yellow-jacketed trash at thirty bob a 
week-what hope was there in a job like that? It was just a derelict’s job, a 
blind-alley job Evening after evening, walking up and down the dreary misty 
street after the library was shut, Gordon and Rosemary argued about it 
She kept on and on at him Would he go back to the New Albion? Why 
wouldn’t he go back to the New Albion? He always told her that the New 
Albion wouldn’t take him back After all, he hadn’t applied for the job and 
there was no knowing whether he could get it, he preferred to keep it 
uncertain There was something about him now that dismayed and frightened 
her He seemed to have changed and deteriorated so suddenly She divined, 
though he did not speak to her about it, that desire of his to escape from all 
effort and all decency, to sink down, down into the ultimate mud It was not 
only from money but from life itself that he was turning away They did not 
argue now as they had argued in the old days before Gordon had lost his job. In 
those days she had not paid much attention to his preposterous theories His 
tirades against the money-morality had been a kind of joke between them And 
it had hardly seemed to matter that time was passing and that Gordon’s chance 
of earning a decent living was infinitely remote She had still thought of herself 
as a young girl and of the future as limitless She had watched him fling away 
two years of his life-two years of her life, for that matter, and she would have 
felt it ungenerous to protest 

But now she was growing frightened Time’s wmged chariot was hurrying 
near When Gordon lost his job she had suddenly realized, with the sense of 
making a startling discovery, that after all she was no longer very young 
Gordon’s thirtieth birthday was past, her own was not far distant And what 
lay ahead of them? Gordon was sinking effortless into grey, deadly failure He 
seemed to want to sink What hope was there that they could ever get married 
now? Gordon knew that she was right The situation was impossible And so 
the thought, unspoken as yet, grew gradually in both their minds that they 
would have to part-for good 

One night they were to meet under the railway arches It was a horrible 
January night, no mist, for once, only a vile wind that screeched round corners 
and flung dust and torn paper into your face He waited for her, a small 
slouching figure, shabby almost to raggedness, his hair blown about by the 
wind She was punctual, as usual She ran towards him, pulled his face down, 
and kissed his cold cheek 

‘Gordon, dear, how cold you are* Why did you come out without an 
overcoat?’ 

‘My overcoat’s up the spout I thought you knew,’ 

‘Oh, dear' Yes ’ 

She looked up at him, a small frown between her black brows He looked so 
haggard, so despondent, there in the lll-ht archway, his face full of shadows 
She wound her arm through his and pulled him out into the light, 

‘Let’s keep walking It’s too cold to stand about I’ve got something 



ji6 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

serious I want to say to you ’ 

‘What’ 1 

‘I expect you’ll be very angry with me ’ 

‘What is it’’ 

‘This afternoon I went and saw Mr Erskine I asked leave to speak to him for 
a few minutes ’ 

He knew what was coming He tried to free his arm from hers, but she held 
on to it 

‘WelP’ he said sulkily 

‘I spoke to him about you I asked him if he’d take you back Of course he 
said trade was bad and they couldn’t afford to take on new staff and all that But 
I reminded him of what he’d said to you, and he said, Yes, he’d always thought 
you were very promising And in the end he said he’d be quite ready to find a 
job for you if you’d come back So you see I was right They will give you the 
job ’ 

He did not answer She squeezed his arm ‘So wow what do you think about 
it’’ she said 

‘You know what I think,’ he said coldly 

Secretly he was alarmed and angry This was what he had been fearing He 
had known all along that she would do it sooner or later It made the issue more 
definite and his own blame clearer He slouched on, his hands still m his coat 
pockets, letting her cling to his arm but not looking towards her 
‘You’re angry with me?’ she said 

‘No, I’m not But I don’t see why you had to do lt-behind my back ’ 

That wounded her She had had to plead very hard before she had managed 
to extort that promise from Mr Erskine And it had needed all her courage to 
beard the managing director m his den She had been in deadly fear that she 
might be sacked for doing it But she wasn’t going to tell Gordon anything of 
that 

‘I don’t think you ought to say behind your back After all, I was only trying 
to help you ’ 

‘How does it help me to get the offer of a job I wouldn’t touch with a stick’’ 
‘You mean you won’t go back, even now’’ 

‘Never ’ 

‘Why’’ 

‘Must we go into it again?’ he said wearily 

She squeezed his arm with all her strength and pulled him round, making 
him face her There was a kind of desperation m the way she clung to him She 
had made her last effort and it had failed It was as though she could feel him 
receding, fading away from her like a ghost 
‘You’ll break my heart if you go on like this,’ she said 
‘I wish you wouldn’t trouble about me It would be so much simpler if you 
didn’t.’ 

‘But why do you have to throw your life away’’ 

‘I tell you I pan’t help it. I’ve got to stick to my guns ’ 

‘You know what this will mean’’ 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying jij 

With a chill at his heart, and yet with a feeling of resignation, even of relief, 
he said ‘You mean we shall have to part-not see each other again’’ 

They had walked on, and now they emerged into the Westminster Bridge 
Road The wind met them with a scream, whirling at them a cloud of dust that 
made both of them duck their heads They halted again Her small face was full 
of lines, and the cold wind and the cold lamplight did not improve it 
‘You want to get rid of me,’ he said 
‘No No It’s not exactly that ’ 

‘But you feel we ought to part ’ 

‘How can we go on like this’’ she said desolately 
‘It’s difficult, I admit ’ 

‘It’s all so miserable, so hopeless! What can it ever lead to’’ 

‘So you don’t love me after alP’ he said 
‘I do, I do' You know I do ’ 

‘In a way, perhaps But not enough to go on loving me when it’s certain I’ll 
never have the money to keep you You’ll have me as a husband, but not as a 
lover It’s still a question of money, you see ’ 

‘It is not money, Gordon 1 It’s not that ’ 

‘Yes, it’s just money There’s been money between us from the start 
Money, always money 1 ’ 

The scene continued, but not for very much longer Both of them were 
shivering with cold There is no emotion that matters greatly when one is 
standing at a street corner in a biting wind When finally they parted it was 
with no irrevocable farewell She simply said, ‘I must get back,’ kissed him, 
and ran across the road to the tram-stop Mainly with relief he watched her go 
He could not stop now to ask himself whether he loved her Simply he wanted 
to get away-away from the windy street, away from scenes and emotional 
demands, back m the frowzy solitude of his attic If there were tears in his eyes 
it was only from the cold of the wind 
With Julia it was almost worse She asked him to go and see her one evening 
This was after she had heard, from Rosemary, of Mr Erksine’s offer of a job 
The dreadul thing with Julia was that she understood nothing, absolutely 
nothing, of his motives All she understood was that a ‘good’ job had been 
offered him and that he had refused it She implored him almost on her knees 
not to throw this chance away And when he told her that his mind was made 
up, she wept, actually wept That was dreadful The poor goose-like girl, with 
streaks of grey in her hair, weeping without grace or dignity in her little Drage- 
furmshed bed-sittmg room 1 This was the death of all her hopes She had 
watched the family go down and down, moneyless and childless, into grey 
obscurity. Gordon alone had had it in him to succeed, and he, from mad 
perverseness, would not He knew what she was thinking, he had to induce in 
himself a kind of brutality to stand firm It was only because of Rosemary and 
Julia that he cared, Ravelston did not matter, because Ravelston understood. 
Aunt Angela and Unde Walter, of course, were bleating weakly at him m long, 
fatuous letters But them he disregarded 
In desperation Julia asked him, what did he mean to do now that he had 



yi8 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

flung away his last chance of succeeding in life He answered simply, ‘My 
poems 5 He had said the same to Rosemary and to Ravelston With Ravelston 
the answer had sufficed Rosemary had no longer any belief m his poems, but 
she would not say so As for Julia, his poems had never at any time meant 
anything to her ‘I don’t see much sense in writing if you can’t make money out 
of it,’ was what she had always said And he himself did not believe m his 
poems any longer But he still struggled to ‘write’, at least at times Soon after 
he changed his lodgings he had copied out on to clean sheets the completed 
portions of London Pleasures- not quite four hundred lines, he discovered 
Even the labour of copying it out was a deadly bore Yet he still worked on it 
occasionally, cutting out a line here, altering another there, not making or even 
expecting to make any progress Before long the pages were as they had been 
before, a scrawled, grimy labyrinth of words He used to carry the wad of 
grimy manuscript about with him m his pocket The feeling of it there upheld 
him a little, after all it was a kind of achievement, demonstrable to himself 
though to nobody else There it was, sole product of two years-of a thousand 
hours’ work, it might be He had no feeling for it any longer as a poem The 
whole concept of poetry was meaningless to him now It was only that if 
London Pleasures were ever finished it would be something snatched from fate, 
a thing created outside the money-world But he knew, far more clearly than 
before, that it never would be finished How was it possible that any creative 
impulse should remain to him, in the hfe he was living now? As time went on, 
even the desire to finish London Pleasures vanished He still carried the 
manuscript about m his pocket, but it was only a gesture, a symbol of his 
private war He had finished for ever with that futile dream of being a ‘writer’ 
After all, was not that too a species of ambition? He wanted to get away from all 
that, below all that Down, down 1 Into the ghost-kingdom, out of the reach of 
hope, out of the reach of fear* Under ground, under ground 1 That was where 
he wished to be 

Yet m a way it was not so easy One night about nine he was lying on his bed, 
with the ragged counterpane over his feet, his hands under his head to keep 
them warm TKe fire was out The dust was thick on everything The 
aspidistra had died a week ago and was withering upright in its pot He slid a 
shoeless foot from under the counterpane, held it up, and looked at it His sock 
was full of holes-there were more holes than sock- So here he lay, Gordon 
Comstock, m a slum attic on a ragged bed, with his feet sticking out of his 
socks, with one and fourpence in the world, with three decades behind him and 
nothing, nothing accomplished 1 Surely now he was past redemption? Surely, 
try as they would, they couldn’t prise him out of a hole like this? He had 
wanted to reach the mud- well, this was the mud, wasn’t it? 

Yet he knew that it was not so That other world, the world of money and 
success, is always so strangely near You don’t escape it merely by taking 
refuge in dirt and misery. He had been frightened as well as angry when 
Rosemary told him about Mr Erskine’s offer It brought the danger so close to 
hun A letter, a telephone message, and from this squalor he could step straight 
bacfc into the money-world-back to four quid a week, back to effort and 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying yip 

decency and slavery Going to the devil isn’t so easy as it sounds Sometimes 
your salvation hunts you down like the Hound of Heaven 

For a while he lay m an almost mindless state, gazing at the ceiling The 
utter futility of just lying there, dirty and cold, comforted him a little But 
presently he was roused by a light tap at the door He did not stir It was 
Mother Meakin, presumably, though it did not sound like her knock 
‘Come m,’ he said 
The door opened It was Rosemary 

She stepped m, and then stopped as the dusty sweetish smell of the room 
caught her Even m the bad light of the lamp she could see the state of filth the 
room was in- the litter of food and papers on the table, the grate full of cold 
ashes, the foul crocks m the fender, the dead aspidistra As she came slowly 
towards the bed she pulled her hat off and threw it on to the chair 
‘ What a place for you to live in 1 ’ she said 
‘So you’ve come back’’ he said 
‘Yes’ 

He turned a little away from her, his arm over his face ‘Come back to lecture 
me some more, I suppose’’ 

‘No’ 

‘Then why’’ 

‘Because-’ 

She had knelt down beside the bed. She pulled his arm away, put her face 
forward to kiss him, then drew back, surprised, and began to stroke the hair 
over his temple with the tips of her fingers 
‘Oh, Gordon 1 ’ 

‘What’’ 

‘You’ve got grey in your hair 1 ’ 

‘Have I’ Where’’ 

‘Here-over the temple There’s quite a little patch of it It must have 
happened all of a sudden ’ 

‘ “My golden locks time hath to silver turned,”’ he said indifferently 
‘So we’re both going grey,’ she said 

She bent her head to show him the three white hairs on her crown Then she 
wriggled herself on to the bed beside him, put an arm under him, pulled him 
towards her, covered his face with kisses He let her do it He did not want this 
to happen-it was the very thing that he least wanted But she had wriggled 
herself beneath him, they were breast to breast. Her body seemed to melt into 
his By the expression of her face he knew what had brought her here. After all, 
she was virgin She did not know what she was doing. It was magnanimity, 
pure magnanimity, that moved her His wretchedness had drawn her back to 
him Simply because he was penniless and a failure she had got to yield to him, 
even if it was only once 
‘I had to come back,’ she said 
‘Why’’ 

‘I couldn’t bear to think of you here alone. It seemed so awful, leaving you 
like that ’ 



j20 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

‘You did quite right to leave me You’d much better not have come back 
You know we can’t ever get married ’ 

‘I don’t care. That isn’t how one behaves to people one loves I don’t care 
whether you marry me or not I love you ’ 

‘This isn’t wise,’ he said 

‘I don’t care I wish I’d done it years ago ’ 

‘We’d much better not ’ 

‘Yes ’ 

‘No’ 

‘Yes'’ 

After all, she was too much for him He had wanted her so long, and he could 
not stop to weigh the consequences So it was done at last, without much 
pleasure, on Mother Meakm’s dingy bed Presently Rosemary got up and 
rearranged her clothes The room, though stuffy, was dreadfully cold They 
were both shivering a little She pulled the coverlet further over Gordon He 
lay without stirring, his back turned to her, his face hidden against his arm 
She knelt down beside the bed, took his other hand, and laid it for a moment 
against her cheek He scarcely noticed her Then she shut the door quietly 
behind her and tiptoed down the bare, evil-smellmg stairs She felt dismayed, 
disappointed, and very cold 


II 


Spring, spring! Bytuene Mershe ant Averil, when spray bigmneth to spring' 
When shaws be sheene and swards full fayre, and leaves both large and longe' 
When the hounds of spring are on winter’s traces, m the spring time, the only 
pretty ring time, when the birds do sing, hey-ding-a-ding ding, cuckoo, jug- 
jug, pu-wee, ta-witta-woo' And so on and so on and so on See almost any poet 
between the Bronze Age and 1805 

But how absurd that even now, in the era of central heating and tinned 
peaches, a thousand so-called poets are still writing m the same strain! For 
what difference does spring or winter or any other time of year make to the 
average civilized person nowadays? In a town like London the most striking 
seasonal change, apart from the mere change of temperature, is m the things 
you see lying about on the pavement In late winter is is mainly cabbage leaves 
In July you tread on cherry stones, m November on burnt-out fireworks. 
Towards Chnstmas the orange peel grows thicker It was a different matter in 
the Middle Ages There was some sense in writing poems about spring when 
spring meant fresh meat and green vegetables after months of frowsting m 
some wmdowless hut on a diet of salt fish and mouldy bread. 

If it was spring Gordon failed to notice it March in Lambeth did not remind 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying j 21 

you of Persephone The days grew longer, there were vile dusty winds and 
sometimes in the sky patches of harsh blue appeared Probably there were a 
few sooty buds on the trees if you cared to look for them The aspidistra, it 
turned out, had not died after all, the withered leaves had dropped off it, but it 
was putting forth a couple of dull green shoots near its base 

Gordon had been three months at the library now The stupid slovenly 
routine did not irk him The library had swelled to a thousand ‘assorted titles’ 
and was bringing Mr Cheeseman a pound a week clear profit, so Mr 
Cheeseman was happy after his fashion He was, nevertheless, nurturing a 
secret grudge against Gordon Gordon had been sold to him, so to speak, as a 
drunkard He had expected Gordon to get drunk and miss a day’s work at least 
once, thus giving a sufficient pretext for docking his wages, but Gordon had 
failed to get drunk Queerly enough, he had no impulse to drink nowadays He 
would have gone without beer even if he could have afforded it Tea seemed a 
better poison All his desires and discontents had dwindled He was better off 
on thirty bob a week than he had been previously on two pounds The thirty 
bob covered, without too much stretching, his rent, cigarettes, a washing bill 
of about a shilling a week, a little fuel, and his meals, which consisted almost 
entirely of bacon, bread-and-marg, and tea, and cost about two bob a day, gas 
included. Sometimes he even had sixpence over for a seat at a cheap but lousy 
picture-house near the Westminster Bridge Road He still carried the grimy 
manuscript of London Pleasures to and fro m his pocket, but it was from mere 
force of habit, he had dropped even the pretence of working All his evenings 
were spent in the same way There m the remote frowzy attic, by the fire if 
there was any coal left, m bed if there wasn’t, with teapot and cigarettes handy, 
reading, always reading He read nothing nowadays except twopenny weekly 
papers Tit Bits , Answers 3 Peg's Paper , The Gem, The Magnet , Home Notes , 
The Girl's Own Paper- they were all the same He used to get them a dozen at a 
time from the shop Mr Cheeseman had great dusty stacks of them, left over 
from his uncle’s day and used for wrapping paper Some of them were as much 
as twenty years old 

He had not seen Rosemary for weeks past She had written a number of 
times and then, for some reason, abruptly stopped writing, Ravelston had 
written once, asking him to contribute an article on twopenny libraries to 
Antichrist Julia had sent a desolate little letter, giving family news Aunt 
Angela had had bad colds all the winter, and Uncle Walter was complaining of 
bladder trouble Gordon did not answer any of their letters He would have 
forgotten their existence if he could They and their affection were only an 
encumbrance He would not be free, free to sink down into the ultimate mud, 
till he had cut his links with all of them, even with Rosemary 
One afternoon he was choosing a book for a tow-headed factory girl, when 
someone he only saw out of the corner of his eye came into the library and 
hesitated just inside the door. 

‘What kind of book did you want?’ he asked the factory girl, 

‘Oo-jest a fond of a romance, please ’ 

Gordon selected a romance. As he turned, his heart bounded violently , The 



7 22 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

person who had just come m was Rosemary She did not make any sign, but 
stood waiting, pale, and worried-looking, with something ominous in her 
appearance 

He sat down to enter the book on the girl’s ticket, but his hands had begun 
trembling so that he could hardly do it He pressed the rubber stamp m the 
wrong place The girl trailed out, peeping into the book as she went Rosemary 
was watching Gordon’s face It was a long time since she had seen him by 
daylight, and she was struck by the change m him He was shabby to the point 
of raggedness, his face had grown much thinner and had the dmgy, greyish 
pallor of people who live on bread and margarine He looked much 
older-thirty-five at the least But Rosemary herself did not look quite as usual 
She had lost her gay trim bearing, and her clothes had the appearance of 
having been thrown on m a hurry It was obvious that there was something 
wrong 

He shut the door after the factory girl ‘I wasn’t expecting you,’ he began 
‘I had to come I got away from the studio at lunch time I told them I was 
ill ’ 

‘You don’t look well Here, you’d better sit down ’ 

There was only one chair m the library He brought it out from behind the 
desk and was moving towards her, rather vaguely, to offer some kind of caress 
Rosemary did not sit down, but laid her small hand, from which she had 
removed the glove, on the top rung of the chair-back By the pressure of her 
fingers he could see how agitated she was 

‘Gordon, I’ve a most awful thing to tell you. It’s happened after all ’ 
‘What’s happened?’ 

‘I’m going to have a baby ’ 

‘A baby? Oh, Christ f’ 

He stopped short For a moment he felt as though someone had struck him a 
violent blow under the ribs He asked the usual fatuous question 
‘Are you sure?’ 

‘Absolutely It’s been weeks now If you knew the time I’ve had 1 I kept 
hoping and hoping- 1 took some pills-oh, it was too beastly l’ 

‘A baby 1 Oh, God, what fools we were 1 As though we couldn’t have foreseen 
if’ 

‘I know I suppose it was my fault I- 
‘Damn 1 Here comes somebody ’ 

The door-bell ping’d A fat, freckled woman with an ugly under-lip came m 
at a rolling gait and demanded ‘Something with a murder m it ’ Rosemary had 
sat down and was twisting her glove round and round her fingers The fat 
woman was exacting. Each book that Gordon offered her she refused on the 
ground that she had ‘had it already’ or that it ‘looked dry’. The deadly news 
that Rosemary had brought had unnerved Gordon His heart pounding, his 
entrails constricted, he had to pull out book after book and assure the fat 
woman that this was the very book she was looking for At last, after nearly ten 
minutes, he managed to fob her off with something which she said grudgingly 
she ‘didn’t think she’d had before’ 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 72 3 

He turned back to Rosemary ‘Well, what the devil are we going to do about 
it?’ he said as soon as the door had shut 

‘I don’t see what I can do If I have this baby I’ll lose my job, of course But 
it isn’t only that I’m worrying about It’s my people finding out My 
mother-oh, dear' It simply doesn’t bear thinking of ’ 

‘Ah, your people’ I hadn’t thought of them One’s people’ What a cursed 
incubus they are’’ 

‘My people are all right They’ve always been good to me But it’s different 
with a thing like this ’ 

He took a pace or two up and down Though the news had scared him he had 
not really grasped it as yet The thought of a baby, his baby, growing m her 
womb had awoken in him no emotion except dismay He did not think of the 
baby as a living creature, it was a disaster pure and simple And already he saw 
where it was gomg to lead 

‘We shall have to get married, I suppose,’ he said flatly 
‘Well, shall we? That’s what I came here to ask you ’ 

‘But I suppose you want me to marry you, don’t you?’ 

‘Not unless you want to I’m not going to tie you down I know it’s against 
your ideas to marry You must decide for yourself ’ 

‘But we’ve no alternative-if you’re really gomg to have this baby ’ 

‘Not necessarily That’s what you’ve got to decide Because after all there is 
another way ’ 

‘What way?’ 

‘Oh, you know A girl at the studio gave me an address A friend of hers had 
it done for only five pounds ’ 

That pulled him up For the first time he grasped, with the only kind of 
knowledge that matters, what they were really talking about. The words ‘a 
baby’ took on a new significance They did not mean any longer a mere 
abstract disaster, they meant a bud of flesh, a bit of himself, down there m her 
belly, alive and growing His eyes met hers They had a strange moment of 
sympathy such as they had never had before For a moment he did feel that in 
some mysterious way they were one flesh Though they were feet apart he felt 
as though they were joined together-as though some invisible living cord 
stretched from her entrails to his, He knew then that it was a dreadul thing they 
were contemplatmg-a blasphemy, if that word had any meaning Yet if it had 
been put otherwise he might not have recoiled from it, It was the squalid detail 
of the five pounds that brought it home 
‘No fear’’ he said ‘Whatever happens we’re not going to do that It’s 
disgusting ’ 

‘I know it is But I can’t have the baby without being married.’ 

‘No’ If that’s the alternative I’ll marry you I’d sooner cut my right hand off 
than do a thing like that.’ 

Ping’ went the door-bell Two ugly louts in cheap bright blue suits, and a 
girl with a fit of the giggles, came in One of the youths asked with a sort of 
sheepish boldness for ‘something with a kick in it-somethmg smutty’. 
Silently, Gordon indicated the shelves where the ‘sex’ books were kept There 



J24 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

were hundreds of them m the library They had titles like Secrets of Pans and 
The Man She Trusted , on their tattered yellow jackets were pictures of half- 
naked girls lying on divans with men in dinner-jackets standing over them 
The stories inside, however, were painfully harmless The two youths and the 
girl ranged among them, sniggering over the pictures on their covers, the girl 
letting out little squeals and pretending to be shocked They disgusted Gordon 
so much that he turned his back on them till they had chosen their books 
When they had gone he came back to Rosemary’s chair He stood behind 
her, took hold of her small firm shoulders, then slid a hand inside her coat and 
felt the warmth of her breast He liked the strong springy feeling of her body, 
he liked to think that down there, a guarded seed, his baby was growing She 
put a hand up and caressed the hand that was on her breast, but did not speak 
She was waiting for him to decide 
‘If I marry you I shall have to turn respectable,’ he said musingly 
‘Could you?’ she said with a touch of her old manner 
‘I mean I shall have to get a proper job-go back to the New Albion I 
suppose they’d take me back ’ 

He felt her grow very still and knew that she had been waiting for this Yet 
she was determined to play fair She was not going to bully him or cajole him 
‘I never said I wanted you to do that I want you to marry me-yes, because 
of the baby But it doesn’t follow you’ve got to keep me ’ 

‘There’s no sense in marrying if I can't keep you Suppose I married you 
when I was like I am at present-no money and no proper job? What would you 
do then?’ 

‘I don’t know I’d go on working as long as I could And afterwards, when 
the baby got too obvious-well, I suppose I’d have to go home to father and 
mother ’ 

‘That would be jolly for you, wouldn’t it? But you were so anxious for me to 
go back to the New Albion before You haven’t changed your mind?’ 

‘I’ve thought things over I know you’d hate to be tied to a regular job I 
don’t blame you You’ve got your own life to live ’ 

He thought it over a little while longer ‘It comes down to this Either I 
marry you and go back to the New Albion, or you go to one of those filthy 
doctors and get yourself messed about for five pounds ’ 

At this she twisted herself out of his grasp and stood up facing him His 
blunt words had upset her They had made the issue clearer and uglier than 
before 

‘Oh, why did you say that?’ 

‘Well, those are the alternatives.’ 

‘I’d never thought of it like that I came here meaning to be fair And now it 
sounds as if I was trying to bully you into it- trying to play on your feelings by 
threatening to get rid of the baby A sort of beastly blackmail ’ 

‘I didn’t mean that I was only stating facts ’ 

Her face was full of lines, the black brows drawn together But she had 
sworn to herself that she would not make a scene He could guess what this 
meant toher. He had never met her people, but he could imagine them He had 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 72 5 

some notion of what it might mean to go back to a country town with an 
illegitimate baby, or, what was almost as bad, with a husband who couldn’t 
keep you But she was going to play fair No blackmail' She drew a sharp 
inward breath, taking a decision 

‘All right, then, I’m not going to hold that over your head It’s too mean 
Marry me or don’t marry me, just as you like But I’ll have the baby, anyway ’ 
‘You’d do that? Really?’ 

‘Yes, I think so ’ 

He took her in his arms Her coat had come open, her body was warm against 
him He thought he would be a thousand kinds of fool if he let her go Yet the 
alternative was impossible, and he did not see it any less clearly because he held 
her m his arms 

‘Of course, you’d like me to go back to the New Albion,’ he said 
‘No, I wouldn’t Not if you don’t want to ’ 

‘Yes, you would After all, it’s natural You want to see me earning a decent 
income again In a good job, with four pounds a week and an aspidistra in the 
window Wouldn’t you, now? Own up ’ 

‘All right, then-yes, I would But it’s only something I’d like to see 
happening, I’m not going to make you do it I’d just hate you to do it if you 
didn’t really want to I want you to feel free ’ 

‘Really and truly free?’ 

‘Yes’ 

‘You know what that means? Supposing I decided to leave you and the baby 
in the lurch?’ 

‘Well-if you really wanted to You’re free-quite free ’ 

After a little while she went away Later in the evening or tomorrow he 
would let her know what he decided Of course it was not absolutely certain 
that the New Albion would give him a job even if he asked them, but 
presumably they would, considering what Mr Erskine had said Gordon tried 
to think and could not There seemed to be more customers than usual this 
afternoon It maddened him to have to bounce out of his chair every time he 
had sat down and deal with some fresh influx of fools demanding crime-stories 
and sex-stones and romances Suddenly, about six o’clock, he turned out the 
lights, locked up the library, and went out He had got to be alone The library 
was not due to shut for two hours yet God knew what Mr Cheeseman would 
say when he found out He might even give Gordon the sack Gordon did not 
care 

He turned westward, up Lambeth Cut It was a dull sort of evening, not 
cold There was muck underfoot, white lights, and hawkers screaming. He had 
got to think this thing out, and he could think better walking But it was so 
hard, so hard* Back to the New Albion, or leave Rosemary in the lurch, there 
was no other alternative It was no use thinking, for instance, that he might 
find some ‘good’ job which would offend his sense of decency a bit less. There 
aren’t so many ‘good’ jobs waiting for moth-eaten people of thirty. The New 
Albion was the only chance he had or ever would have 

At the corner, on the Westminster Bridge Road, he paused a moment. There 



j 2 6 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

were some posters opposite, livid in the lamplight A monstrous one, ten feet 
high at least, advertised Bovex The Bovex people had dropped Corner Table 
and got on to a new tack They were running a series of four-line 
poems-Bovex Ballads, they were called There was a picture of a horribly 
eupeptic family, with grinning ham-pink faces, sitting at breakfast, 
underneath, in blatant lettering 

Why should you be thin and white’ 

And have that washed-out feeling’ 

Just take hot Bovex every mght- 
Invigorating-healing 1 

Gordon gazed at the thing He drank in its puling silliness God, what trash' 
‘Invigoratmg-healing'’ The weak incompetence of it' It hadn’t even the 
vigorous badness of the slogans that really stick Just soppy, lifeless drivel It 
would have been almost pathetic m its feebleness if one hadn’t reflected that all 
over London and all over every town m England that poster was plastered, 
rotting the minds of men He looked up and down the graceless street Yes, war 
is coming soon You can’t doubt it when you see the Bovex ads The electric 
drills m our streets presage the rattle of the machine-guns Only a little while 
before the aeroplanes come Zoom-bang' A few tons of T N T to send our 
civilization back to hell where it belongs 
He crossed the road and walked on, southward A curious thought had 
struck him He did not any longer want that war to happen It was the first time 
m months-years, perhaps-that he had thought of it and not wanted it 
If he went back to the New Albion, m a month’s time he might be writing 
Bovex Ballads himself To go back to that' Any ‘good’ job was bad enough, but 
to be mixed up m that ' Christ' Of course he oughtn’t to go back It was just a 
question of having the guts to stand firm But what about Rosemary? He 
thought of the kmd of life she would live at home, m her parents’ house, with a 
baby and no money, and of the news running through that monstrous family 
that Rosemary had married some awful rotter who couldn’t even keep her. She 
would have the whole lot of them nagging at her together Besides, there was 
the baby to think about The money-god is so cunning If he only baited his 
traps with yachts and race-horses, tarts and champagne, how easy it would be 
to dodge them It is when he gets at you through your sense of decency that he 
finds you helpless 

The Bovex Ballad jungledm Gordon’s head He ought to stand firm He had 
made war on money-he ought to stick it out After all, hitherto he had stuck it 
oqt, after a fashion. He looked back over his life. No use deceiving himself It 
had been a dreadful life-lonely, squalid, futile He had lived thirty years and 
achieved nothing except misery. But that was what he had chosen. It was what 
he wanted, even now He wanted to sink down, down mto the muck where 
money does not rule. But this baby-business had upset everything It was a 
pretty banal predicament, after all Private vices, public virtues-the dilemma 
is as old as the world 

He looked UP and saw that he was passing a public library A thought struck 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying y 2 y 

him That baby What did it mean, anyway, having a baby’ What was it that 
was actually happening to Rosemary at this moment’ He had only vague and 
general ideas of what pregnancy meant No doubt they would have books in 
there that would tell him about it He went m The lending library was on the 
left It was there that you had to ask for works of reference 
The woman at the desk was a university graduate, young, colourless, 
spectacled, and intensely disagreeable She had a fixed suspicion that no 
one-at least, no male person-ever consulted works of reference except m 
search of pornography As soon as you approached she pierced you through 
and through with a flash of her pmce-nez and let you know that your dirty 
secret was no secret from her After all, all works of reference are 
pornographical, except perhaps Whitaker’s Almanack You can put even the 
Oxford Dictionary to evil purposes by looking up words like — and — 
Gordon knew her type at a glance, but he was too preoccupied to care 
‘Have you any book on gynaecology’’ he said 

‘Any whafi’ demanded the young woman with a pmce-nez flash of 
unmistakable triumph As usual 1 Another male in search of dirt 1 

‘Well, any books on midwifery’ About babies being born, and so forth 5 
‘We don’t issue books of that description to the general public,’ said the 
young woman frostily 

‘I’m sorry- there’s a point I particularly want to look up ’ 

‘Are you a medical student’’ 

‘No’ 

‘Then I don’t quite see what you want with books on midwifery ’ 

Curse the woman* Gordon thought At another time he would have been 
afraid of her, at present, however, she merely bored him 

‘If you want to know, my wife’s going to have a baby We neither of us know 
much about it I want to see whether I can find out anything useful ’ 

The young woman did not believe him He looked too shabby and worn, she 
decided, to be a newly married man However, it was her job to lend out books, 
and she seldom actually refused them, except to children You always got your 
book in the end, after you had been made to feel yourself a dirty swine With an 
aseptic air she led Gordon to a small table in the middle of the library and 
presented him with two fat books m brown covers Thereafter she left him 
alone, but kept an eye on him from whatever part of the library she happened 
to be in He could feel her pmce-nez probing the back of his neck at long range, 
trying to decide from his demeanour whether he was really searching for 
information or merely picking out the dirty bits 
He opened one of the books and searched inexpertly through it There were 
acres of close-printed text full of Latin words That was no use He wanted 
something simple-pictures, for choice How long had this thing been going 
on’ Six weeks-mne weeks, perhaps Ah* This must be it. 

He came on a print of a mne weeks’ foetus. It gave him a shock to see it, for 
he had not expected it to look in the least like that It was a deformed, 
gnomelike thing, a sort of clumsy caricature of a human being, with a huge 
domed head as big as the rest of its body In the middle of the great blank 



J28 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

expanse of head there was a tiny button of an ear The thing was m profile, its 
boneless arm was bent, and one hand, crude as a seal’s flipper, covered its 
face-fortunately, perhaps Below were little skinny legs, twisted like a 
monkey’s with the toes turned in It was a monstrous thing, and yet strangely 
human It surprised him that they should begin looking human so soon He 
had pictured something much more rudimentary, a mere blob of nucleus, like 
a bubble of frog-spawn But it must be very tiny, of course He looked at the 
dimensions marked below Length 30 millimetres About the size of a large 
gooseberry 

But perhaps it had not been going on quite so long as that He turned back a 
page or two and found a print of a six weeks’ foetus A really dreadful thing this 
time-a thing he could hardly even bear to look at Strange that our beginnings 
and endings are so ugly- the unborn as ugly as the dead This thing looked as if 
it were dead already Its huge head, as though too heavy to hold upright, was 
bent over at right angles at the place where its neck ought to have been There 
was nothing you could call a face, only a wrinkle representing the eye-or was it 
the mouth? It had no human resemblance this time, it was more like a dead 
puppy-dog Its short thick arms were very doglike, the hands being mere 
stumpy paws 155 millimetres long-no bigger than a hazel nut 

He pored for a long time over the two pictures Their ugliness made them 
more credible and therefore more movmg His baby had seemed real to him 
from the moment when Rosemary spoke of abortion, but it had been a reality 
without visual shape-something that happened m the dark and was only 
important after it had happened But here was the actual process taking place 
Here was the poor ugly thing, no bigger than a gooseberry, that he had created 
by his heedless act Its future, its continued existence perhaps, depended on 
him. Besides, it was a bit of himself-it was himself Dare one dodge such a 
responsibility as that? 

But what about the alternative? He got up, handed over his books to the 
disagreeable young woman, and went out, then, on an impulse, turned back 
and went into the other part of the library, where the periodicals were kept 
The usual crowd of mangy-lookmg people were dozing over the papers. There 
was one table set apart for women’s papers He picked up one of them at 
random and bore it off to another table 

It was an American paper of the more domestic kind, mainly adverts with a 
few stories lurking apologetically among them And what adverts' Quickly he 
flicked over the shiny pages Lingerie, jewellery, cosmetics, fur coats, silk 
stockings flicked up and down like the figures in a child’s peepshow Page after 
page, advert after advert Lipsticks, undies, tinned food, patent medicines, 
slimming cures, face-creams A sort of cross-section of the money- world A 
panorama of ignorance, greed, vulgarity, snobbishness, whoredom, and 
disease. 

And that was the world they wanted him to re-enter That was the business 
m which he had a chance of Making Good He flicked over the pages more 
slowly. Flick, flick Adorable-until she smiles* The food that is shot out of a 
gun Do you let foot-fag affect your personality? Get back that peach-bloom on 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 72 9 

a Beautyrest Mattress Only a penetrating face-cream will reach that under- 
surface dirt Pink toothbrush is her trouble How to alkalize your stomach 
almost instantly Roughage for husky kids Are you one of the four out of five? 
The world-famed Culturequick Scrapbook Only a drummer and yet he 
quoted Dante 

Christ, what muck 1 

But of course it was an American paper The Americans always go one better 
on any kinds of beastliness, whether it is ice-cream soda, racketeering, or 
theosophy He went over to the women’s table and picked up another paper 
An English one this time Perhaps the ads in an English paper wouldn’t be 
quite so bad-a little less brutally offensive? 

He opened the paper Flick, flick Britons never shall be slaves 1 
Flick, flick Get that waist-line back to normal' She said ‘Thanks awfully for 
the lift,’ but she thought , ‘Poor boy, why doesn’t somebody tell him?’ How a 
woman of thirty-two stole her young man from a girl of twenty Prompt relief 
for feeble kidneys Silkyseam-the smooth-sliding bathroom tissue Asthma 
was choking her' Are you ashamed of your undies? Kiddies clamour for their 
Breakfast Crisps Now I’m a schoolgirl complexion all over Hike all day on a 
slab of Vitamalt' 

To be mixed up m that' To be m it and of it-part and parcel of it' God, God, 
God' 

Presently he went out The dreadful thing was that he knew already what he 
was going to do His mind was made up-had been made up for a long time 
past When this problem appeared it had brought its solution with it, all his 
hesitation had been a kind of make-believe He felt as though some force 
outside himself were pushing him There was a telephone booth near by 
Rosemary’s hostel was on the phone-she ought to be at home by now He went 
into the booth, feelmg m his pocket Yes, exactly two pennies He dropped 
them into the slot, swung the dial 

A refaned, adenoidal feminine voice answered him ‘Who’s thyah, please?’ 
He pressed Button A So the die was cast 
‘Is Miss Waterlow m?’ 

‘Who’s thyah , please?’ 

‘Say it’s Mr Comstock She’ll know Is she at home?’ 

‘Ay’ll see Hold the lane, please ’ 

A pause 

‘Hullo' Is that you, Gordon?’ 

‘Hullo' Hullo' Is that you, Rosemary? I just wanted to tell you I’ve thought 
it over-I’ve made up my mind ’ 

‘Oh' 5 There was another pause With difficulty mastering her voice, she 
added ‘Well, what did you decide?’ 

‘It’s all right I’ll take the job-if they’ll give it me, that is.’ 

‘Oh, Gordon, I’m so glad' You’re not angry with me? You don’t feel I’ve 
sort of bullied you into it?’ 

‘No, it’s all right It’s the only thing I can do. I’ve thought everything out. 
I’ll go up to the office and see them tomorrow ’ 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 


730 

‘I am so glad 1 ’ 

‘Of course. Fin assuming they’ll give me the job But I suppose they will, 
after what old Erskine said 5 

‘I’m sure they will But, Gordon, there’s just one thing You will go there 
nicely dressed, won’t you? It might make a lot of difference ’ 

‘I know I’ll have to get my best suit out of pawn Ravelston will lend me the 
money ’ 

‘Never mind about Ravelston I’ll lend you the money I’ve got four pounds 
put away I’ll run out and wire it you before the post-office shuts I expect 
you’ll want some new shoes and a new tie as well And, oh, Gordon'’ 

‘What?’ 

‘Wear a hat when you go up to the office, won’t you? It looks better, wearing 
a hat ’ 

‘A hat' God 1 I haven’t worn a hat for two years Must I?’ 

‘Well-it does look more busmess-like, doesn’t it?’ 

‘Oh, all right A bowler hat, even, if you think I ought ’ 

‘I think a soft hat would do But get your hair cut, won’t you, there’s a dear?’ 
‘Yes, don’t you worry I’ll be a smart young business man Well groomed, 
and all that ’ 

‘Thanks ever so, Gordon dear I must run out and wire that money Good 
night and good luck ’ 

‘Good night * 

He came out of the booth So that was that He had torn it now, right 
enough 

He walked rapidly away What had he done? Chucked up the sponge' 
Broken all his oaths' His long and lonely war had ended in ignominious defeat 
Circumcise ye your foreskins, saith the Lord He was coming back to the fold, 
repentant He seemed to be walking faster than usual There was a peculiar 
sensation, an actual physical sensation, in his heart, in his limbs, all over him 
What was it? Shame, misery, despair? Rage at being back in the clutch of 
money? Boredom when he thought of the deadly future? He dragged the 
sensation forth, faced it, examined it It was relief 
Yes, that was the truth of it Now that the thmg was done he felt nothing but 
relief, relief that now at last he had finished with dirt, cold, hunger, and 
loneliness and could get back to decent, fully human life His resolutions, now 
that he had broken them, seemed nothing but a frightful weight that he had 
cast off Moreover, he was aware that he was only fulfilling his destiny In some 
corner of his mind he had always known that this would happen. He thought of 
the day when he had given them notice at the New Albion, and Mr Erskine’s 
kind, red, beefish face, gently counselling him not to chuck up a ‘good’ job for 
nothing How bitterly he had sworn, then, that he was done with ‘good’ jobs 
for ever' Yet it was foredoomed that he should come back, and he had known it 
even then And it was not merely because of Rosemary and the baby that he 
had done it That was the obvious cause, the precipitating cause, but even 
without it the end would have been the same, if there had been no baby to think 
about, something else would have forced his hand For it was what, in his 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 7 51 

secret heart, he had desired 

After all he did not lack vitality, and that moneyless existence to which he 
had condemned himself had thrust him ruthlessly out of the stream of life He 
looked back over the last two frightful years He had blasphemed against 
money, rebelled against money, tried to live like an anchorite outside the 
money-world, and it had brought him not only misery, but also a frightful 
emptiness, an mescapable sense of futility To abjure money is to abjure life 
Be not righteous over much, why shouldst thou die before thy time’ Now he 
was back m the money-world, or soon would be Tomorrow he would go up to 
the New Albion, in his best suit and overcoat (he must remember to get his 
overcoat out of pawn at the same time as his suit), in homburg hat of the correct 
gutter-crawling pattern, neatly shaved and with his hair cut short He would 
be as though born anew The sluttish poet of today would be hardly 
recognizable m the natty young business man of tomorrow They would take 
him back, right enough, he had the talent they needed He would buckle to 
work, sell his soul, and hold down his job 

And what about the future’ Perhaps it would turn out that these last two 
years had not left much mark upon him They were merely a gap, a small 
setback m his career Quite quickly, now that he had taken the first step, he 
would develop the cynical, blinkered business mentality He would forget his 
fine disgusts, cease to rage against the tyranny of money-cease to be aware of 
it, even-cease to squirm at the ads for Bovex and Breakfast Crisps He would 
sell his soul so utterly that he would forget it had ever been his He would get 
married, settle down, prosper moderately, push a pram, have a villa and a radio 
and an aspidistra He would be a law-abiding little cit like any other law- 
abiding little cit-a soldier in the strap-hanging army Probably it was better 
so 

He slowed his pace a little He was thirty and there was grey m his hair, yet 
he had a queer feeling that he had only just grown up It occurred to him that 
he was merely repeating the destiny of every human being Everyone rebels 
against the money-code, and everyone sooner or later surrenders He had kept 
up his rebellion a little longer than most, that was all And he had made such a 
wretched failure of it 1 He wondered whether every anchorite in his dismal cell 
pines secretly to be back m the world of men Perhaps there were a few who did 
not Somebody or other had said that the modem world is only habitable by 
saints and scoundrels He, Gordon, wasn’t a saint Better, then, to be an 
unpretending scoundrel along with the others It was what he had secretly 
pined for, now that he had acknowledged his desire and surrendered to it, he 
was at peace 

He was making roughly in the direction of home He looked up at the houses 
he was passing. It was a street he did not know Oldish houses, mean-looking 
and rather dark, let off in flatlets and single rooms for the most part Railed 
areas, smoke-grimed bricks, whited steps, dingy lace curtains ‘Apartments’ 
cards in half the wmdows, aspidistras in nearly all A typical lower-middle- 
class street But not, on the whole, the kind of street that he wanted to see 
blown to hell by bombs 



j32 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

He wondered about the people in houses like those They would be, for 
example, small clerks, shop-assistants, commercial travellers, insurance touts, 
tram conductors Did they know that they were only puppets dancing when 
money pulled the strings? You bet they didn’t And if they did, what would 
they care? They were too busy being born, being married, begetting, working, 
dying It mightn’t be a bad thing, if you could manage it, to feel yourself one of 
them, one of the ruck of men Our civilization is founded on greed and fear, but 
m the lives of common men the greed and fear are mysteriously transmuted 
into something nobler The lower-middle- class people in there, behind their 
lace curtains, with their children and their scraps of furniture and their 
aspidistras-they lived by the money-code, sure enough, and yet they 
contrived to keep their decency The money-code as they interpreted it was 
not merely cynical and hoggish They had their standards, their inviolable 
points of honour They ‘kept themselves respectable’-kept the aspidistra 
flying Besides, they were alive They were bound up m the bundle of life 
They begot children, which is what the saints and the soul-savers never by any 
chance do 

The aspidistra is the tree of life, he thought suddenly 
He was aware of a lumpish weight in his inner pocket It was the manuscript 
of London Pleasures He took it out and had a look at it under a street lamp A 
great wad of paper, soiled and tattered, with that peculiar, nasty, gnmed-at- 
the-edges look of papers which have been a long time m one’s pocket About 
four hundred lines in all The sole fruit of his exile, a two years’ foetus which 
would never be born Well, he had finished with all that Poetry' Poetry , 
indeed' In 1935 

What should he do with the manuscript? Best thing, shove it down the w c 
But he was a long way from home and had not the necessary penny He halted 
by the iron grating of a drain In the window of the nearest house an aspidistra, 
a striped one, peeped between the yellow lace curtains 
He unrolled a page of London Pleasures In the middle of the labyrinthine 
scrawlings a line caught his eye Momentary regret stabbed him After all, 
parts of it weren’t half bad' If only it could ever be finished' It seemed such a 
shame to shy it away after all the work he had done on it Save it, perhaps? 
Keep it by him and finish it secretly in his spare time? Even now it might come 
to something 

No, no' Keep your parole Either surrender or don’t surrender 
He doubled up the manuscript and stuffed it between the bars of the dram 
It fell with a plop into the water below 
Vicisti, O aspidistra 1 



12 


Ravelston wanted to say good-bye outside the registry office, but they would 
not hear of it, and insisted on dragging him off to have lunch with them Not at 
Modigliani’s, however They went to one of those jolly little Soho restaurants 
where you can get such a wonderful four-course lunch for half a crown They 
had garlic sausage with bread and butter, fried plaice, entrecbte aux pommes 
frites, and a rather watery caramel pudding, also a bottle of M6doc Supdrieur, 
three and sixpence the bottle 

Only Ravelston was at the wedding The other witness was a poor meek 
creature with no teeth, a professional witness whom they picked up outside the 
registry office and tipped half a crown Julia hadn’t been able to get away from 
the teashop, and Gordon and Rosemary had only got the day off from the office 
by pretexts carefully manoeuvred a long time ahead Nobody knew they were 
getting married, except Ravelston and Julia Rosemary was going to go on 
working at the studio for another month or two She had preferred to keep her 
marriage a secret until it was over, chiefly for the sake of her innumerable 
brothers and sisters, none of whom could afford wedding presents Gordon, 
left to himself, would have done it m a more regular manner He had even 
wanted to be married in church But Rosemary had put her foot down to that 
idea 

Gordon had been back at the office two months now Four ten a week he was 
getting It would be a tight pinch when Rosemary stopped working, but there 
was hope of a rise next year They would have to get some money out of 
Rosemary’s parents, of course, when the baby was due to arrive Mr Clew had 
left the New Albion a year ago, and his place had been taken by a Mr Warner, a 
Canadian who had been five years with a New York publicity firm Mr Warner 
was a live wire but quite a likeable person He and Gordon had a big job on 
hand at the moment The Queen of Sheba Toilet Requisites Co were 
sweeping the country with a monster campaign for their deodorant, April 
Dew They had decided that B O and halitosis were worked out, or nearly, 
and had been racking their brains for a long time past to think of some new way 
of scaring the public Then some bright spark suggested, What about smelling 
feet ^ That field had never been exploited and had immense possibilities The 
Queen of Sheba had turned the idea over to the New Albion What they asked 
for was a really telling slogan, something in the class of ‘Night- 
starvation’ -something that would rankle in the public consciousness like a 
poisoned arrow, Mr Warner had thought it over for three days and then 



j 34 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

emerged with the unforgettable phrase ‘P P 5 ‘P P ’ stood for Pedic 
Perspiration It was a real flash of genius, that It was so simple and so 
arresting Once you knew what they stood for, you couldn’t possibly see those 
letters C P P 5 without a guilty tremor Gordon had searched for the word 
‘pedic’ m the Oxford Dictionary and found that it did not exist But Mr 
Warner has said, Hell 1 what did it matter, anyway? It would put the wind up 
them just the same The Queen of Sheba had jumped at the idea, of course 
They were putting every penny they could spare into the campaign On 
every hoarding m the British Isles huge accusing posters were hammering 
‘P P ’ into the public mmd All the posters were identically the same They 
wasted no words, but just demanded with sinister simplicity 


‘PP’ 

WHAT ABOUT 

YOU? 

Just that-no pictures, no explanations There was no longer any need to say 
what ‘P P ’ stood for, everyone m England knew it by this time Mr Warner, 
with Gordon to help him, was designing the smaller ads for the newspapers 
and magazines It was Mr Warner who supplied the bold sweeping ideas, 
sketched the general lay-out of the ads, and decided what pictures would be 
needed, but it was Gordon who wrote most of the letterpress- wrote the 
f harrowing little stones, each a realistic novel m a hundred words, about 
despairing virgins of thirty, and lonely bachelors whose girls had 
unaccountably thrown them over, and overworked wives who could not afford 
to change their stockings once a week and who saw their husbands subsiding 
into the clutches of ‘the other woman’ He did it very well, he did it far better 
than he had ever done anything else m his life Mr Warner gave golden reports 
of him There was no doubt about Gordon’s literary ability He could use 
words with the economy that is only learned by years of effort. So perhaps his 
long agonizing struggles to be a ‘writer’ had not been wasted after all 
They said good-bye to Ravelston outside the restaurant The taxi bore them 
away Ravelston had insisted on paying for the taxi from the registry office, so, 
they felt they could afford another taxi Warmed with wine, they lolled 
together, m the dusty May sunshine that filtered through the taxi window 
Rosemary’s head on Gordon’s shoulder, their hands together in her lap He 
played with the very slender wedding ring on Rosemary’s ring finger Rolled 
gold, five and sixpence. It looked all right, however 
T must remember to take if off before I go to the studio tomorrow,’ said 
Rosemary reflectively 

‘To think we’re really married 1 Till death do us part We’ve done it now, 
right enough.’ 

Terrifying, isn’t it?’ 

‘I expect we’ll settle down all right, though With a house of our own and a 
pram and an aspidistra ’ 

He lifted her face up to kiss her She had a touch of make-up on today, the 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying j 35 

first he had ever seen on her, and not too skilfully applied Neither of their 
faces stood the spring sunshine very well There were fine lines on Rosemary’s, 
deep seams on Gordon’s Rosemary looked twenty-eight, perhaps, Gordon 
looked at least thirty-five But Rosemary had pulled the three white hairs out 
of her crown yesterday 

‘Do you love me 5 ’ he said 

‘Adore you, silly ’ 

‘I believe you do It’s queer I’m thirty and moth-eaten ’ 

‘I don’t care ’ 

They began to kiss, then drew hurriedly apart as they saw two scrawny 
upper-middle-class women, m a car that was moving parallel to their own, 
observing them with catty interest 

The flat off the Edgware Road wasn’t too bad It was a dull quarter and 
rather a slummy street, but it was convenient for the centre of London, also it 
was quiet, being a blind alley From the back window (it was a top floor) you 
could see the roof of Paddington Station Twenty-one and six a week, 
unfurnished One bed, one reception, kitchenette, bath (with geyser), and w c 
They had got their furniture already, most of it on the never-never Ravelston 
had given them a complete set of crockery for a wedding present-a very kindly 
thought, that Julia had given them a rather dreadful ‘occasional’ table, 
veneered walnut with a scalloped edge Gordon had begged and implored her 
not to give them anything Poor Julia 1 Christmas had left her utterly broke, 
usual, and Aunt Angela’s birthday had been in March But it would have ^ 
seemed to Julia a kind of crime against nature to let a wedding go by without 
giving a present God knew what sacrifices she had made to scrape together 
thirty bob for that ‘occasional’ table. They were still very short of linen and 
cutlery Things would have to be bought piecemeal, when they had a few bob 
to spare 

They ran up the last flight of stairs in their excitement to get to the flat It 
was all ready to inhabit They had spent their evenings for weeks past getting 
the stuff in It seeemed to them a tremendous adventure to have this place of 
their own Neither of them had ever owned furniture before, they had been 
living m furnished rooms ever since their childhood As soon as they got inside 
they made a careful tour of the flat, checking, examining, and admiring 
everything as though they did not know by heart already every item that was 
there They fell into absurd raptures over each separate stick of furniture The 
double bed with the clean sheet ready turned down over the pink eiderdown 1 
The linen and towels stowed away in the chest of drawers* The gateleg table, 
the four hard chairs, the two armchairs, the divan, the bookcase, the red Indian 
rug, the copper coal-scuttle which they had picked up cheap in the Caledonian 
market* And it was all their own, every bit of it was their own-at least, so long 
as they didn’t get behind with the instalments* They went into the kitchenette 
Everything was ready, down to the minutest detail Gas stove, meat safe, 
enamel-topped table, plate rack, saucepans, kettle, sink basket, mops, dish- 
cloths-even a tin of Panshine, a packet of soapflakes, and a pound of washing 
soda in a jam-jar. It was all ready for use, ready for life You could have cooked 



JS6 Keep the Aspidistra Flying 

a meal m it here and now They stood hand in hand by the enamel-topped 
table, admiring the view of Paddington Station 

‘Oh, Gordon, what fun it all is 1 To have a place that’s really our own and no 
landladies interfering 1 ’ 

‘What I like best of all is to think of having breakfast together You opposite 
me on the other side of the table, pouring out coffee How queer it is* We’ve 
known each other all these years and we’ve never once had breakfast together ’ 
‘Let’s cook something now I’m dying to use those saucepans ’ 

She made some coffee and brought it into the front room on the red 
lacquered tray which they had bought in Selfridge’s Bargain Basement 
Gordon wandered over to the ‘occasional’ table by the window Far below the 
mean street was drowned m a haze of sunlight, as though a glassy yellow sea 
had flooded it fathoms deep He laid his coffee cup down on the ‘occasional’ 
table 

‘This is where we’ll put the aspidistra,’ he said 
‘Put the what ?’ 

‘The aspidistra ’ 

She laughed He saw that she thought he was joking, and added ‘We must 
remember to go out and order it before all the florists are shut ’ 

‘Gordon 1 You don’t mean that? You aren’t really thinking of having an 
aspidistra?’ 

‘Yes, lam We won’t let ours get dusty, either They say an old toothbrush is 
the best thing to clean them with ’ 

She had come over to his side, and she pinched his arm 
‘You aren’t serious, by any chance, are you?’ 

‘Why shouldn’t I be?’ 

‘An aspidistra 1 To think of having one of those awful depressing things m 
here 1 Besides, where could we put it? I’m not going to have it in this room, and 
in the bedroom it would be worse Fancy having an aspidistra in one’s 
bedroom*’ 

‘We don’t want one m the bedroom This is the place for an aspidistra In 
the front window, where the people opposite can see it ’ 

‘Gordon, you are jokmg-you must be joking' ’ 

‘No, I’m not I tell you we’ve got to have an aspidistra ’ 

‘But why?’ 

‘It’s the proper thing to have It’s the first thing one buys after one’s 
married In fact, it’s practically part of the wedding ceremony ’ 

‘Don’t be so absurd' I simply couldn’t bear to have one of those things in 
here You shall have a geranium if you really must But not an aspidistra.’ 

‘A geranium’s no good It’s an aspidistra we want ’ 

‘Well, we’re not going to have one, that’s flat ’ 

‘Yes, we are Didn’t you promise to obey me just now?’ 

‘No, I did not. We weren’t married in church,’ 

‘Oh, well, it’s implied in the marnage service “Love, honour, and obey” 
and all that ’ 

‘No, it isn’t Anyway we aren’t going to have that aspidistra.’ 



Keep the Aspidistra Flying 


737 


‘Yes, we are ’ 

‘We are not , Gordon 1 ’ 

‘Yes’ 

‘No 1 ’ 

‘Yes'’ 

Wo'’ 

She did not understand him She thought he was merely being perverse 
They grew heated, and, according to their habit, quarrelled violently It was 
their first quarrel as man and wife Half an hour later they went out to the 
florist’s to order the aspidistra 

But when they were half-way down the first flight of stairs Rosemary 
stopped short and clutched the banister Her lips parted, she looked very queer 
for a moment She pressed a hand against her middle 
‘Oh, Gordon'’ 

‘What?’ 

‘I felt it move'’ 

‘Felt what move?’ 

‘The baby I felt it move inside me ’ 

‘You did?’ 

A strange, almost terrible feeling, a sort of warm convulsion, stirred m his 
entrails For a moment he felt as though he were sexually joined to her, but 
joined m some subtle way that he had never imagined He had paused a step or 
two below her He fell on his knees, pressed his ear to her belly, and listened 
‘I can’t hear anything,’ he said at last 
‘Of course not, silly' Not for months yet ’ 

‘But I shall be able to hear it later on, shan’t I?’ 

‘I think so You can hear it at seven months, /can feel it at four I think that’s 
how it is ’ 

‘But it really did move? You’re sure? You really felt it move?’ 

‘Oh, yes It moved ’ 

For a long time he remained kneeling there, his head pressed against the 
softness of her belly She clasped her hands behind his head and pulled it 
closer He could hear nothing, only the blood drumming m his own ear But 
she could not have been mistaken Somewhere m there, in the safe, warm, 
cushioned darkness, it was alive and stirring 
Well, once again things were happening m the Comstock family 



nineteen 

eighty-four 



PART I 


i 


It was a bright cold day m Aprils and the clocks were striking thirteen 
Winston Smith;, his chm nuzzled into his breast m an effort to escape the vile 
wind, slipped quickly through the glass doors of Victory Mansions, though not 
quickly enough to prevent a swirl of gritty dust from entering along with him 

The hallway smelt of boiled cabbage and old rag mats At one end of it a 
coloured poster, too large for indoor display, had been tacked to the wall It 
depicted simply an enormous face, more than a metre wide the face of a man of 
about forty-five, with a heavy black moustache and ruggedly handsome 
features Winston made for the stairs It was no use trying the lift Even at the 
best of times it was seldom working, and at present the electric current was cut 
off during daylight hours It was part of the economy drive in preparation for 
Hate Week The flat was seven flights up, and Winston, who was thirty-nine 
and had a varicose ulcer above his right ankle, went slowly, resting several 
times on the way On each landing, opposite the lift-shaft, the poster with the 
enormous face gazed from the wall It was one of those pictures which are so 
contrived that the eyes follow you about when you move big brother is 
watching you, the caption beneath it ran 

Inside the flat a fruity voice was reading out a list of figures which had 
something to do with the production of pig-iron The voice came from an 
oblong metal plaque like a dulled mirror which formed part of the surface of 
the right-hand wall Winston turned a switch and the voice sank somewhat, 
though the words were still distinguishable, The instrument (the telescreen, it 
was called) could be dimmed, but there was no way of shutting it off 
completely He moved over to the window a smallish, frail figure, the 
meagreness of his body merely emphasized by the blue overalls which were the 
uniform of the Party His hair was very fair, his face naturally sanguine, his 
skin roughened by coarse soap and blunt razor blades and the cold of the 
winter that had just ended 

Outside, even through the shut window-pane, the world looked cold Down 
m the street little eddies of wind were whirling dust and torn paper into spirals, 
and though the sun was shining and the sky a harsh blue, there seemed to be no 



j 44 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

colour m anything, except the posters that were plastered everywhere The 
black-moustachio’d face gazed down from every commanding corner There 
was one on the house-front immediately opposite big brother is watching 
you, the caption said, while the dark eyes looked deep into Winston’s own 
Down at street level another poster, torn at one corner, flapped fitfully m the 
wind, alternately covering and uncovering the single word insoc In the far 
distance a helicopter skimmed down between the roofs, hovered for an instant 
like a bluebottle, and darted away again with a curving flight It was the police 
patrol, snooping into people’s windows The patrols did not matter, however 
Only the Thought Police mattered 

Behind Winston’s back the voice from the telescreen was still babbling away 
about pig-iron and the overfulfilment of the Ninth Three- Year Plan The 
telescreen received and transmitted simultaneously Any sound that Winston 
made, above the level of a very low whisper, would be picked up by it, 
moreover, so long as he remained within the field of vision which the metal 
plaque commanded, he could be seen as well as heard There was of course no 
way of knowing whether you were being watched at any given moment How 
often, or on what system, the Thought Police plugged m on any individual 
wire was guesswork It was even conceivable that they watched everybody all 
the time But at any rate they could plug in your wire whenever they wanted to 
You had to live - did live, from habit that became instinct - in the assumption 
that every sound you made was overheard, and, except m darkness, every 
movement scrutinized 

Winston kept his back turned to the telescreen It was safer, though, as he 
well knew, even a back can be revealing A kilometre away the Ministry of 
Truth, his place of work, towered vast and white above the grimy landscape 
This, he thought with a sort of vague distaste - this was London, chief city of 
Airstrip One, itself the third most populous of the provinces of Oceania He 
tried to squeeze out some childhood memory that should tell him whether 
London had always been quite like this Were there always these vistas of 
rotting nineteenth-century houses, their sides shored up with baulks of 
timber, their windows patched with cardboard and their roofs with corrugated 
iron, their crazy garden walls sagging m all directions? And the bombed sites 
where the plaster dust swirled in the air and the willow-herb straggled over the 
heaps of rubble, and the places where the bombs had cleared a larger patch and 
there had sprung up sordid colonies of wooden dwellings like chicken-houses> 
But it was no use, he could not remember nothing remained of his childhood 
except a series of bright-lit tableaux, occurring against no background and 
mostly unintelligible. 

The Ministry of Truth-Mimtrue, in Newspeak*-was startlingly different 
from any other object in sight It was an enormous pyramidal structure of 
glittering white concrete, soaring up, terrace after terrace, 300 metres into the 
air. From where Winston stood it was just possible to read, picked out on its 
white face in elegant lettering, the three slogans of the Party 

* Newspeak was the official language of Oceania For an account of its structure and etymology 
see Appendix. 



745 


Nineteen Eighty-Four 

WAR IS PEACE 
FREEDOM IS SLAVERY 
IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH 

The Ministry of Truth contained, it was said, three thousand rooms above 
ground level, and corresponding ramifications below Scattered about London 
there were just three other buildings of similar appearance and size So 
completely did they dwarf the surrounding architecture that from the roof of 
Victory Mansions you could see all four of them simultaneously They were 
the homes of the four Ministries between which the entire apparatus of 
government was divided The Mimstry of Truth, which concerned itself with 
news, entertainment, education, and the fine arts The Ministry of Peace, 
which concerned itself with war The Mimstry of Love, which maintained law 
and order And the Mimstry of Plenty, which was responsible for economic 
affairs Their names, in Newspeak Mmitrue, Minipax, Mimluv, and 
Mnuplenty 

The Ministry of Love was the really frightenmg one There were no 
windows in it at all Winston had never been inside the Ministry of Love, nor 
within half a kilometre of it It was a place impossible to enter except on official 
busmess, and then only by penetrating through a maze of barbed-wire 
entanglements, steel doors, and hidden machme-gun nests Even the streets 
leading up to its outer barriers were roamed by gorilla-faced guards m black 
uniforms, armed with jointed truncheons 

Winston turned round abruptly He had set his features into the expression 
of quiet optimism which it was advisable to wear when facing the telescreen 
He crossed the room into the tiny kitchen By leaving the Mimstry at this time 
of day he had sacrificed his lunch m the canteen, and he was aware that there 
was no food in the kitchen except a hunk of dark-coloured bread which had got 
to be saved for tomorrow’s breakfast. He took down from the shelf a bottle of 
colourless liquid with a plain white label marked victory gin It gave off a 
sickly, oily smell, as of Chinese rice-spirit Winston poured out nearly a 
teacupful, nerved himself for a shock, and gulped it down like a dose of 
medicine 

Instantly his face turned scarlet and the water ran out of his eyes The stuff 
was like nitric acid, and moreover, m swallowing it one had the sensation of 
being hit on the back of the head with a rubber club The next moment, 
however, the burning in his belly died down and the world began to look more 
cheerful He took a cigarette from a crumpled packet marked victory 
cigarettes and incautiously held it upright, whereupon the tobacco fell out on 
to the floor With the next he was more successful He went back to the living- 
room and sat down at a small table that stood to the left of the telescreen From 
the table drawer he took out a penholder, a bottle of ink, and a thick, quarto- 
sized blank book with a red back and a marbled cover 

For some reason the telescreen m the living-room was in an unusual 
position. Instead of being placed, as was normal, in the end wall, where it could 
command the whole room, it wfs in the longer wall, opposite the window To 



7^6 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

one side of it there was a shallow alcove in which Winston was now sitting, and 
which, when the flats were built, had probably been intended to hold 
bookshelves By sitting in the alcove, and keeping well back, Winston was able 
to remain outside the range of the telescreen, so far as sight went He could be 
heard, of course, but so long as he stayed m his present position he could not be 
seen It was partly the unusual geography of the room that had suggested to 
him the thing that he was now about to do 

But it had also been suggested by the book that he had just taken out of the 
drawer It was a peculiarly beautiful book Its smooth creamy paper, a little 
yellowed by age, was of a kind that had not been manufactured for at least forty 
years past He could guess, however, that the book was much older than that 
He had seen it lying in the window of a frowsy little junk-shop m a slummy 
quarter of the town (just what quarter he did not now remember) and had been 
stricken immediately by an overwhelming desire to possess it Party members 
were supposed not to go into ordinary shops (‘dealing on the free market’, it 
was called), but the rule was not strictly kept, because there were various 
things, such as shoelaces and razor blades, which it was impossible to get hold 
of in any other way He had given a quick glance up and down the street and 
then had slipped inside and bought the book for two dollars fifty At the time 
he was not conscious of wanting it for any particular purpose He had carried it 
guiltily home m his brief-case Even with nothing written in it, it was a 
compromising possession 

The thing that he was about to do was to open a diary This was not illegal 
(nothing was illegal, since there were no longer any laws), but if detected it was 
reasonably certain that it would be punished by death, or at least by twenty- 
five years m a forced-labour camp Winston fitted a mb into the penholder and 
sucked it to get the grease off The pen was an archaic instrument, seldom used 
even for signatures, and he had procured one, furtively and with some 
difficulty, simply because of a feeling that the beautiful creamy paper deserved 
to be written on with a real mb mstead of being scratched with an ink-pencil 
Actually he was not used to writing by hand Apart from very short notes, it 
was usual to dictate everything into the speakwrite, which was of course 
impossible for his present purpose He dipped the pen into the mk and then 
faltered for just a second A tremor had gone through his bowels To mark the 
paper was the decisive act, In small clumsy letters he wrote 

April 4th, 1984 

He sat back. A sense 6f complete helplessness had descended upon him To 
begin with, he did not know with any certainty that this was 1984 It must be 
round about that date, since he was fairly sure that his age was thirty-nme, and 
he believed that he had been born in 1944 or 1945= but it was never possible 
nowadays to pm down any date within a year or two 

For whom, it suddenly occurred to him to wonder, was he writing this 
diary? For the future, for the unborn His mind hovered for a moment round 
the doubtful date on the page, and then fetched up with a bump against the 
Newspeak word doublethink. For the first traj£ the magnitude of what he had 



Nineteen Eighty-F our 747 

undertaken came home to him How could you communicate with the future^ 
It was of its nature impossible Either the future would resemble the presents 
m which case it would not listen to him or it would be different from it, and his 
predicament would be meaningless 

For some time he sat gazing stupidly at the paper The telescreen had 
changed over to strident military music It was curious that he seemed not 
merely to have lost the power of expressing himself, but even to have forgotten 
what it was that he had originally intended to say For weeks past he had been 
making ready for this moment, and it had never crossed his mind that anything 
would be needed except courage The actual writing would be easy All he had 
to do was to transfer to paper the interminable restless monologue that had 
been running inside his head, literally for years At this moment, however, 
even the monologue had dried up Moreover his varicose ulcer had begun 
itching unbearably He dared not scratch it, because if he did so it always 
became inflamed The seconds were ticking by He was conscious of nothing 
except the blankness of the page m front of him, the itchmg of the skin above 
his ankle, the blaring of the music, and a slight booziness caused by the gm 

Suddenly he began writing m sheer panic, only imperfectly aware of what he 
was setting down His small but childish handwriting straggled up and down 
the page, shedding first its capital letters and finally even its full stops. 

April 4th, 1984 Last night to the flicks All war films One very good one of a ship full of 
refugees being bombed somewhere in the Mediterranean Audience much amused by shots of a 
great huge fat man trying to swim away with a helicopter after him, first you saw him wallowing 
along in the water like a porpoise, then you saw him through the helicopters gunsights, then he was 
full of holes and the sea round him turned pink and he sank as suddenly as though the holes had let 
m the water audience shouting with laughter when he sank then you saw a lifeboat full of children 
with a helicopter hovering over it there was a middle-aged woman might have been a Jewess 
sitting up in the bow with a little boy about three years old in her arms little boy screaming with 
fright and hiding his head between her breasts as if he was trying to burrow right into her and the 
woman putting her arms round him and comforting him although she was blue with fright herself, 
all the time covering him up as much as possible as if she thought her arms could keep the bullets 
off him then the helicopter planted a 20 kilo bomb in among them terrific flash and the boat went 
all to matchwood then there was a wonderful shot of a child’s arm going up up up right up into the 
air a helicopter with a camera in its nose must have followed it up and there was a lot of applause 
from the party seats but a woman down in the prole part of the house suddenly started kicking up a 
fuss and shouting they didnt oughter of showed it not in front of kids they didnt it amt right not in 
front of kids it amt until the police turned her turned her out 1 dont suppose anything happened to 
her nobody cares what the proles say typical prole reaction they never- 

Wmston stopped writing, partly because he was suffering from cramp He 
did not know what had made him pour out this stream of rubbish. But the 
curious thing was that while he was doing so a totally different memory had 
clarified itself in his mind, to the point where he almost felt equal to writing it 
down It was, he now realized, because of this other incident that he had 
suddenly decided to come home and begin the diary today. 

It had happened that morning at the Ministry, if anything so nebulous could 
be said to happen 

It was nearly eleven hundred, and m the Records Department, where 
Winston worked, they were dragging the chairs out of the cubicles and 



J48 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

grouping them m the centre of the hall opposite the big telescreen, in 
preparation for the Two Minutes Hate Winston was just taking his place in 
one of the middle rows when two people whom he knew by sight, but had 
never spoken to, came unexpectedly into the room One of them was a girl 
whom he often passed in the corridors He did not know her name, 
but he knew that she worked in the Fiction Department Presumable - 
since he had sometimes seen her with oily hands and carrying a spanner - she 
had some mechanical job on one of the novel-writing machines She was a 
bold-looking girl, of about twenty-seven, with thick dark hair, a freckled face, 
and swift, athletic movements A narrow scarlet sash, emblem of the Junior 
Anti-Sex League, was wound several times round the waist of her overalls, just 
tightly enough to bring out the shapeliness of her hips Winston had disliked 
her from the very first moment of seeing her He knew the reason It was 
because of the atmosphere of hockey-fields and cold baths and community 
hikes and general clean-mmdedness which she managed to carry about with 
her He disliked nearly all women, and especially the young and pretty ones It 
was always the women, and above all the young ones, who were the most 
bigoted adherents of the Party, the swallowers of slogans, the amateur spies 
and nosers-out of unorthodoxy But this particular girl gave him the 
impression of being more dangerous than most Once when they passed m the 
corridor she had given him a quick sidelong glance which seemed to pierce 
right into him and for a moment had filled him with black terror The idea had 
even crossed his mind that she might be an agent of the Thought Police That, 
it was true, was very unlikely Still, he continued to feel a peculiar uneasiness, 
which had fear mixed up in it as well as hostility, whenever she was anywhere 
near him 

The other person was a man named O’Brien, a member of the Inner Party 
and holder of some post so important and remote that Winston had only a dim 
idea of its nature A momentary hush passed over the group of people round 
the chairs as they saw the black overalls of an Inner Party member 
approaching O’Brien was a large, burly man with a thick neck and a coarse, 
humorous, brutal face In spite of his formidable appearance he had a certain 
charm of manner He had a trick of resettling his spectacles on his nose which 
was curiously disarming - in some indefinable way, curiously civilized It was a 
gesture which, if anyone had still thought in such terms, might have recalled 
an eighteenth-century nobleman offering his snuffbox Winston had seen 
O’Brien perhaps a dozen times m almost as many years He felt deeply drawn 
to him, and not solely because he was intrigued by the contrast between 
O’Brien’s urbane manner and his prize-fighter’s physique Much more it was 
because of a secretly held belief- or perhaps not even a belief, merely a hope - 
that O’Brien’s political orthodoxy was not perfect Something in his face 
suggested it irresistibly And again, perhaps it was not even unorthodoxy that 
was written in his face, but simply intelligence But at any rate he had the 
appearance of being a person that you could talk to if somehow you could cheat 
the telescreen and get him alone Winston had never made the smallest effort to 
verify this guess: indeed, there was no way of doing so At this moment 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 749 

O’Brien glanced at his wrist-watch, saw that it was nearly eleven hundreds and 
evidently decided to stay in the Records Department until the Two Minutes 
Hate was over He took a chair m the same row as Winston, a couple of places 
away A small, sandy-haired woman who worked m the next cubicle to 
Winston was between them The girl with dark hair was sitting immediately 
behind 

The next moment a hideous, grinding speech, as of some monstrous 
machine running without oil, burst from the big telescreen at the end of the 
room It was a noise that set one’s teeth on edge and bristled the hair at the 
back of one’s neck The Hate had started 

As usual, the face of Emmanuel Goldstein, the Enemy of the People, had 
flashed on to the screen There were hisses here and there among the audience 
The little sandy-haired woman gave a squeak of mingled fear and disgust 
Goldstein was the renegade and backslider who once, long ago (how long ago, 
nobody quite remembered), had been one of the leading figures of the Party, 
almost on a level with Big Brother himself, and then had engaged in counter- 
revolutionary activities, had been condemned to death, and had mysteriously 
escaped and disappeared The programmes of the Two Minutes Hate varied 
from day to day, but there was none m which Goldstein was not the principal 
figure He was the primal traitor, the earliest defiler of the Party’s purity All 
subsequent crimes against the Party, all treacheries, acts of sabotage, heresies, 
deviations, sprang directly out of his teaching Somewhere or other he was still 
alive and hatching his conspiracies perhaps somewhere beyond the sea, under 
the protection of his foreign paymasters, perhaps even-so it was occasionally 
rumoured - in some hiding-place m Oceania itself 

Winston’s diaphragm was constricted He could never see the face of 
Goldstein without a painful mixture of emotions It was a lean Jewish face, 
with a great fuzzy aureole of white hair and a small goatee beard - a clever face, 
and yet somehow inherently despicable, with a kind of senile silliness in the 
long thm nose, near the end of which a pair of spectacles was perched It 
resembled the face of a sheep, and the voice, too, had a sheep-like quality 
Goldstein was delivering his usual venomous attack upon the doctrines of the 
Party - an attack so exaggerated and perverse that a child should have been 
able to see through it, and yet just plausible enough to fill one with an alarmed 
feeling that other people, less level-headed than oneself, might be taken m by 
it He was abusing Big Brother, he was denouncing the dictatorship of the 
Party, he was demanding the immediate conclusion of peace with Eurasia, he 
was advocatmg freedom of speech, freedom of the Press, freedom of assembly, 
freedom of thought, he was crying hysterically that the revolution had been 
betrayed - and all this m rapid polysyllabic speech which was a sort of parody 
of the habitual style of the orators of the Party, and even contained Newspeak 
words more Newspeak words, indeed, than any Party member would 
normally use in real life And all the while, lest one should be in any doubt as to 
the reality which Goldstein’s specious claptrap covered, behind his head on 
the telescreen there marched the endless columns of the Eurasian army - row 
after row of solid-looking men with expressionless Asiatic faces, who swam up 



7J0 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

to the surface of the screen and vanished, to be replaced by others exactly 
similar The dull rhythmic tramp of the soldiers’ boots formed the background 
to Goldstein’s bleating voice 

Before the Hate had proceeded for thirty seconds, uncontrollable 
exclamations of rage were breaking out from half the people in the room The 
self-satisfied sheep-like face on the screen, and the terrifying power of the 
Eurasian army behind it, were too much to be borne besides, the sight or even 
the thought of Goldstein produced fear and anger automatically He was an 
object of hatred more constant than either Eurasia or Eastasia, since when 
Oceama was at war with one of these Powers it was generally at peace with the 
other But what was strange was that although Goldstein was hated and 
despised by everybody, although every day and a thousand times a day, on 
platforms, on the telescreen, m newspapers, in books, his theories were 
refuted, smashed, ridiculed, held up to the general gaze for the pitiful rubbish 
that they were - m spite of all this, his influence never seemed to grow less 
Always there were fresh dupes waiting to be seduced by him A day never 
passed when spies and saboteurs acting under his directions were not 
unmasked by the Thought Police He was the commander of a vast shadowy 
army, an underground network of conspirators dedicated to the overthrow of 
the State The Brotherhood, its name was supposed to be There were also 
whispered stories of a terrible book, a compendium of all the heresies, of which 
Goldstem was the author and which circulated clandestinely here and there It 
was a book without a title People referred to it, if at all, simply as the hook But 
one knew of such things only through vague rumours Neither the 
Brotherhood nor the book was a subject that any ordinary Party member would 
mention if there was a way of avoiding it 

In its second minute the Hate rose to a frenzy People were leaping up and 
down in their places and shouting at the tops of their voices in an effort to 
drown the maddemng bleating voice that came from the screen The little 
sandy-haired woman had turned bright pink, and her mouth was opening and 
shutting like that of a landed fish Even O’Brien’s heavy face was flushed He 
was sitting very straight m his chair, his powerful chest swelling and quivering 
as though he were standing up to the assault of a wave The dark-haired girl 
behind Winston had begun crying out ‘Swine' Swine' Swine'’ and suddenly 
she picked up a heavy Newspeak dictionary and flung it at the screen It struck 
Goldstein’s nose and bounced off; the voice continued inexorably In a lucid 
moment Winston found that he was shouting "with the others and kicking his 
heel violently against the rung of his chair The horrible thing about the Two 
Minutes Hate was not that one was obliged to act a part, but, on the contrary, 
that it was impossible to avoid joining in. Within thirty seconds any pretence 
was always unnecessary. A hideous ecstasy of fear and vindictiveness, a desire 
to kill, to torture, to sn^ash faces in with a sledge-hammer, seemed to flow 
through the whole group of people like an electric current, turning one even 
against one’s will into a grimacang, screaming lunatic* And yet the rage that 
one felt Was an abstract, undirected emotion which could be switched from one 
Object tp another like theflame of ablowlamp Thus, at one moment Winston’s 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 757 

hatred was not turned against Goldstein at all, but, on the contrary, against Big 
Brother, the Party, and the Thought Police, and at such moments his heart 
went out to the lonely, derided heretic on the screen, sole guardian of truth and 
sanity in a world of lies And yet the very next instant he was at one with the 
people about him, and all that was said of Goldstein seemed to him to be true 
At those moments his secret loathing of Big Brother changed into adoration, 
and Big Brother seemed to tower up, an invincible, fearless protector, standing 
like a rock against the hordes of Asia, and Goldstein, in spite of his isolation, 
his helplessness, and the doubt that hung about his very existence, seemed like 
some sinister enchanter, capable by the mere power of his voice of wrecking 
the structure of civilization 

It was even possible, at moments, to switch one’s hatred this way 01 that by a 
voluntary act Suddenly, by the sort of violent effort with which one wrenches 
one’s head away from the pillow in a nightmare, Winston succeeded in 
transferring his hatred from the face on the screen to the dark-haired girl 
behind him Vivid, beautiful hallucinations flashed through his mind He 
would flog her to death with a rubber truncheon He would tie her naked to a 
stake and shoot her full of arrows like Saint Sebastian He would ravish her 
and cut her throat at the moment of climax Better than before, moreover, he 
realized why it was that he hated her He hated her because she was young and 
pretty and sexless, because he wanted to go to bed with her and would never do 
so, because round her sweet supple waist, which seemed to ask you to encircle 
it with your arm, there was only the odious scarlet sash, aggressive symbol of 
chastity 

The Hate rose to its climax The voice of Goldstein had become an actual 
sheep’s bleat, and for an instant the face changed into that of a sheep Then the 
sheep-face melted into the figure of a Eurasian soldier who seemed to be 
advancing, huge and terrible, his sub-machine gun roaring, and seeming to 
spring out of the surface of the screen, so that some of the people m the front 
row actually flinched backwards in their seats But in the same moment, 
drawing a deep sigh of relief from everybody, the hostile figure melted into the 
face of Big Brother, black-haired, black-moustachio’d, full of power and 
mysterious calm, and so vast that it almost filled up the screen Nobody heard 
what Big Brother was saying It was merely a few words of encouragement, the 
sort of words that are uttered in the dm of battle, not distinguishable 
individually but restoring confidence by the fact of being spoken Then the 
face of Big Brother faded away again, and instead the three slogans of the Party 
stood out in bold capitals 


WAR IS PEACE 
FREEDOM IS SLAVERY 
IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH 


But the face of Big Brother seemed to persist for several seconds on the 
screen, as though the impact that it had made on everyone’s eyeballs was too 
vivid to wear off immediately The little sandy-haired woman had flung herself 



752 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

forward over the back of the chair m front of her With a tremulous murmur 
that sounded like £ My Saviour'’ she extended her arms towards the screen 
Then she buried her face m her hands It was apparent that she was uttering a 
prayer 

At this moment the entire group of people broke into a deep, slow, 
rhythmical chant of £ B-B ' B-B ' B-B ' 5 - over and over again, very slowly, 

with a long pause between the first £ B’ and the second - a heavy, murmurous 
sound, somehow curiously savage, in the background of which one seemed to 
hear the stamp of naked feet and the throbbing of tom-toms For perhaps as 
much as thirty seconds they kept it up It was a refrain that was often heard m 
moments of overwhelming emotion Partly it was a sort of hymn to the wisdom 
and majesty of Big Brother, but still more it was an act of self-hypnosis, a 
deliberate drowning of consciousness by means of rhythmic noise Winston’s 
entrails seemed to grow cold In the Two Minutes Hate he could not help 
sharing in the general delirium, but this sub-human chanting of £ B-B' 
B-B' 5 always filled him with horror Of course he chanted with the rest it was 
impossible to do otherwise To dissemble your feelings, to control your face, to 
do what everyone else was doing, was an instinctive reaction But there was a 
space of a couple of seconds during which the expression m his eyes might 
conceivably have betrayed him And it was exactly at this moment that the 
significant thing happened - if, indeed, it did happen 

Momentarily he caught O’Brien’s eye O’Brien had stood up He had taken 
off his spectacles and was m the act of resettling them on his nose with his 
characteristic gesture But there was a fraction of a second when their eyes met, 
and for as long as it took to happen Wmston knew-yes, he knew'-t hat O’Brien 
was thinking the same thing as himself An unmistakable message had passed 
It was as though their two minds had opened and the thoughts were flowing 
from one into the other through their eyes £ I am with you,’ O’Brien seemed to 
be saying to him T know precisely what you are feeling I know all about your 
contempt, your hatred, your disgust But don’t worry, I am on your side 1 ’ And 
then the flash of intelligence was gone, and O’Brien’s face was as inscrutable as 
everybody else’s 

That was all, and he was already uncertain whether it had happened Such 
incidents never had any sequel All that they did was to keep alive m him the 
belief, or hope, that others besides himself were the enemies of the Party 
Perhaps the rumours of vast underground conspiracies were true after 
all-perhaps the Brotherhood really existed 1 It was impossible, in spite of the 
endless arrests and confessions and executions, to be sure that the Brotherhood 
was not simply a myth Some days he believed m it, some days not There was 
mo evidence, only fleeting glimpses that might mean anything or nothing 
snatches of overheard conversation, faint scribbles on lavatory walls-once, 
even, when two strangers met, a small movement of the hand which had looked 
as though it might be a signal of recogmtion It was all guesswork very likely 
he had imagined everything He had gone back to his cubicle without lookmg 
at O’Brien again The idea of following up their momentary contact hardly 
crossed his mind. It would have been inconceivably dangerous even if he had 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 75 3 

known how to set about doing it For a second, two seconds, they had 
exchanged an equivocal glance, and that was the end of the story But even that 
was a memorable event, in the locked loneliness m which one had to live 

Winston roused himself and sat up straighter He let out a belch The gm 
was rising from his stomach 

His eyes re-focused on the page He discovered that while he sat helplessly 
musing he had also been writing, as though by automatic action And it was no 
longer the same cramped, awkward handwriting as before His pen had slid 
voluptuously over the smooth paper, printing m large neat capitals- 

DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER 
DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER 
DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER 
DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER 
DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER 

over and over again, filling half a page 

He could not help feeling a twinge of pamc It was absurd, since the wntmg 
of those particular words was not more dangerous than the initial act of 
opening the diary, but for a moment he was tempted to tear out the spoiled 
pages and abandon the enterprise altogether 

He did not do so, however, because he knew that it was useless Whether he 
wrote down with big brother, or whether he refrained from writing it, made 
no difference Whether he went on with the diary, or whether he did not go on 
with it, made no difference The Thought Police would get him just the same 
He had committed- would still have committed, even if he had never set pen to 
paper-the essential crime that contained all others in itself Thoughtcnme, 
they called it Thoughtcnme was not a thing that could be concealed for ever 
You might dodge successfully for a while, even for years, but sooner or later 
they were bound to get you 

It was always at mght-the arrests invariably happened at mght The sudden 
jerk out of sleep, the rough hand shaking your shoulder, the lights glaring m 
your eyes, the ring of hard faces round the bed In the vast majority of cases 
there was no trial, no report of the arrest People simply disappeared, always 
during the mght Your name was removed from the registers, every record of 
everything you had ever done was wiped out, your one-time existence was 
denied and then forgotten You were abolished, annihilated vaporized was the 
usual word 

For a moment he was seized by a kind of hysteria He began writing in a 
hurried untidy scrawl 

theyll shoot me 1 dont care theyll shoot me m the back of the neck 1 dont care down with big 
brother they always shoot you m the back of the neck 1 dont care down with big brother- 

He sat back m his chair, slightly ashamed of himself, and laid down the pen 
The next moment he started violently. There was a knocking at the door 



754 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

Already' He sat as still as a mouse, m the futile hope that whoever it was 
might go away after a single attempt But no, the knocking was repeated The 
worst thing of all would be to delay His heart was thumping like a drum, but 
his face, from long habit, was probably expressionless He got up and moved 
heavily towards the door 


2 


As he put his hand to the door-knob Winston saw that he had left the diary 
open on the table down with big brother was written over it, in letters almost 
big enough to be legible across the room It was an inconceivably stupid thing 
to have done But, he realized, even m his panic he had not wanted to smudge 
the creamy paper by shutting the book while the ink was wet 
He drew m his breath and opened the door Instantly a warm wave of relief 
flowed through him A colourless, crushed-lookmg woman, with wispy hair 
and a lined face, was standing outside 

‘Oh, comrade,’ she began m a dreary, whining sort of voice, ‘I thought I 
heard you come m Do you think you could come across and have a look at our 
kitchen sink? It’s got blocked up and-’ 

It was Mrs Parsons, the wife of a neighbour on the same floor (‘Mrs’ was a 
word somewhat discountenanced by the Party-you were supposed to call 
everyone ‘comrade’-but with some women one used it instinctively ) She was 
a woman of about thirty, but looking much older One had the impression that 
there was dust m the creases of her face Winston followed her down the 
passage These amateur repair jobs were an almost daily irritation Victory 
Mansions were old flats, built in 1930 or thereabouts, and were falling to 
pieces The plaster flaked constantly from ceilings and walls, the pipes burst in 
every hard frost, the roof leaked whenever there was snow, the heating system 
was usually running at half steam when it was not closed down altogether from 
motives of economy Repairs, except what you could do for yourself, had to be 
sanctioned by remote committees which were liable to hold up even the 
mending of a window-pane for two years 
‘Of course it’s only because Tom isn’t home,’ said Mrs Parsons vaguely 
The Parsons’ flat was bigger than Winston’s, and dingy m a different way. 
Everything had a battered, trampled-on look, as though the place had just been 
visited by some large violent animal Games lmpedimenta-hockey-sticks, 
boxing-gloves, a burst football, a pair of sweaty shorts turned inside out-lay 
all over the floor, and on the table there was a htter of dirty dishes and dogeared 
exercise-books On the walls were scarlet banners of the Y outh League and the 
Spies, and a full-sized poster of Big Brother There was the usual boiled- 
cabbage smell, common to the whole building, but it was shot through by a 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 755 

sharper reek of sweat, which-one knew this at the first sniff, though it was hard 
to say how-was the sweat of some person not present at the moment In 
another room someone with a comb and a piece of toilet paper was trying to 
keep tune with the military music which was still issuing from the telescreen 
‘It’s the children,’ said Mrs Parsons, casting a half-apprehensive glance at 
the door ‘They haven’t been out today And of course-’ 

She had a habit of breaking off her sentences m the middle The kitchen sink 
was full nearly to the brim with filthy greenish water which smelt worse than 
ever of cabbage Winston knelt down and examined the angle-joint of the pipe 
He hated using his hands, and he hated bending down, which was always liable 
to start him coughing Mrs Parsons looked on helplessly 

‘Of course if Tom was home he’d put it right in a moment,’ she said ‘He 
loves anything like that He’s ever so good with his hands, Tom is ’ 

Parsons was Winston’s fellow employee at the Ministry of Truth He was a 
fattish but active man of paralysing stupidity, a mass of imbecile 
enthusiasms-one of those completely unquestiomng, devoted drudges on 
whom, more even than on the Thought Police, the stability of the Party 
depended At thirty-five he had just been unwillingly evicted from the Youth 
League, and before graduating into the Youth League he had managed to stay 
on in the Spies for a year beyond the statutory age At the Ministry he was 
employed m some subordinate post for which intelligence was not required, 
but on the other hand he was a leading figure on the Sports Committee and all 
the other committees engaged in organizing community hikes, spontaneous 
demonstrations, savings campaigns, and voluntary activities generally He 
would inform you with quiet pride, between whiffs of his pipe, that he had put 
m an appearance at the Community Centre every evening for the past four 
years An overpowering smell of sweat, a sort of unconscious testimony to the 
strenuousness of his life, followed him about wherever he went, and even 
remained behind him after he had gone 

‘Have you got a spanner^’ said Wmston, fiddling with the nut on the angle- 
joint 

‘A spanner,’ said Mrs Parsons, immediately becoming invertebrate ‘I don’t 
know. I’m sure Perhaps the children-’ 

There was a trampling of boots and another blast on the comb as the 
children charged into the livmg-room Mrs Parsons brought the spanner 
Winston let out the water and disgustedly removed the clot of human hair that 
had blocked up the pipe He cleaned his fingers as best he could in the cold 
water from the tap and went back into the other room 
‘Up with your hands f’ yelled a savage voice 

A handsome, tough-looking boy of nine had popped up from behind the 
table and was menacing him with a toy automatic pistol, while his small sister, 
about two years younger, made the same gesture with a fragment of wood 
Both of them were dressed m the blue shorts, grey shirts, and red neckerchiefs 
which were the uniform of the Spies Winston raised his hands above his head, 
but with an uneasy feeling, so vicious was the boy’s demeanour, that it was not 
altogether a game 



j$6 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

‘You’re a traitor 1 ’ yelled the boy ‘You’re a thought-criminal' You’re a 
Eurasian spy 1 I’ll shoot you, I’ll vaporize you, I’ll send you to the salt mines 1 ’ 
Suddenly they were both leaping round him, shouting ‘Traitor’’ and 
‘Thought-criminal’’ the little girl imitating her brother m every movement It 
was somehow slightly frightening, like the gambolling of tiger cubs which will 
soon grow up into man-eaters There was a sort of calculating ferocity in the 
boy’s eye, a quite evident desire to hit or kick Winston and a consciousness of 
being very nearly big enough to do so It was a good job it was not a real pistol 
he was holding, Winston thought 

Mrs Parsons’ eyes flitted nervously from Winston to the children, and back 
again In the better light of the living-room he noticed with interest that there 
actually was dust in the creases of her face 
‘They do get so noisy,’ she said ‘They’re disappointed because they 
couldn’t go to see the hanging, that’s what it is I’m too busy to take them, and 
Tom won’t be back from work in time ’ 

‘Why can’t we go and see the hanging^’ roared the boy in his huge voice 
‘Want to see the hanging' Want to see the hanging'’ chanted the little girl, 
still capering round 

Some Eurasian prisoners, guilty of war crimes, were to be hanged in the 
Park that evening, Winston remembered This happened about once a month, 
and was a popular spectacle Children always clamoured to be taken to see it 
He took his leave of Mrs Parsons and made for the door But he had not gone 
six steps down the passage when something hit the back of his neck an 
agonizingly painful blow It was as though a red-hot wire had been jabbed into 
him He spun round just m time to see Mrs Parsons dragging her son back into 
the doorway while the boy pocketed a catapult 

‘Goldstein 1 ’ bellowed the boy as the door closed on him But what most 
struck Winston was the look of helpless fright on the woman’s greyish face 
Back m the flat he stepped quickly past the telescreen and sat down at the 
table again, still rubbing his neck. The music from the telescreen had stopped 
Instead, a clipped military Voice was reading out, with a sort of brutal relish, a 
description of the armaments of the new Floating Fortress which had just been 
anchored between Iceland and the Faroe Islands 
With those children, he thought, that wretched woman must lead a life of 
terror Another year, two years, and they would be watching her night and day 
for symptoms of unorthodoxy. Nearly all children nowadays were horrible 
What was worst of all was that by means of such organizations as the Spies they 
were systematically turned into ungovernable little savages, and yet this 
produced in them no tendency whatever to rebel against the discipline of the 
Party. On the contrary, they adored the Party and everything connected with 
it. The songs, the processions, the banners, the hiking, the drilling with 
dummy rifles, the yelling of slogans, the worship of Big Brother-it was all a 
sort of glorious game to them. All their ferocity was turned outwards, against 
the enemies of the State, against foreigners, traitors, saboteurs, thought- 
criminals. It was almost normal for people over thirty to be frightened of their 
own children And with good reason, for hardly a week passed m which The 



Nineteen Eighty-Four jyj 

Times did not carry a paragraph describing how some eavesdropping little 
sneak- ‘child hero 5 was the phrase generally used-had overheard some 
compromising remark and denounced its parents to the Thought Police 
The sting of the catapult bullet had worn off He picked up his pen half- 
heartedly, wondering whether he could find something more to write in the 
diary Suddenly he began thinking of O’Brien again 
Years ago-how long was n? Seven years it must be-he had dreamed that he 
was walking through a pitch-dark room And someone sitting to one side of 
him had said as he passed ‘We shall meet m the place where there is no 
darkness ’ It was said very quietly, almost casually-a statement, not a 
command He had walked on without pausing What was curious was that at 
the time, in the dream, the words had not made much impression on him It 
was only later and by degrees that they had seemed to take on significance He 
could not now remember whether it was before or after having the dieam that 
he had seen O’Brien for the first time, nor could he remember when he had 
first identified the voice as O’Brien’s But at any rate the identification existed 
It was O’Brien who had spoken to him out of the dark 
Winston had never been able to feel sure-even after this morning’s flash of 
the eyes it was still impossible to be sure-whether O’Brien was a friend or an 
enemy Nor did it even seem to matter greatly There was a link of 
understanding between them, more important than affection or partisanship 
‘We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,’ he had said Winston 
did not know what it meant, only that m some way or another it would come 
true 

The voice from the telescreen paused A trumpet call, clear and beautiful, 
floated into the stagnant air The voice continued raspmgly 

‘Attention 1 Your attention, please 1 A newsflash has this moment arrived 
from the Malabar front Our forces in South India have won a glorious victory 
I am authorized to say that the action we are now reporting may well bring the 
war within measurable distance of its end Here is the newsflash-’ 

Bad news coming, thought Wmston And sure enough, following on a gory 
description of the annihilation of a Eurasian army, with stupendous figures of 
killed and prisoners, came the announcement that, as from next week, the 
chocolate ration would be reduced from thirty grammes to twenty 
Winston belched again The gin was wearmg off, leaving a deflated feeling 
The telescreen-perhaps to celebrate the victory, perhaps to drown the 
memory of the lost chocolate-crashed into ‘Oceania, ’tis for thee’ You were 
supposed to stand to attention However, in his present position he was 
invisible 

‘Oceania, ’tis for thee’ gave way to lighter music Winston walked over to the 
window, keeping his back to the telescreen The day was still cold and clear. 
Somewhere far away a rocket bomb exploded with a dull, reverberating roar 
About twenty or thirty of them a week were falling on London at present 
Down in the street the wind flapped the tom poster to and fro, and the word 
ingsoc fitfully appeared and vanished Ingsoc The sacred principles of 
Ingsoc Newspeak, doublethink, the mutability of the past He felt as though 



755 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

he were wandering m the forests of the sea bottoms lost m a monstrous world 
where he himself was the monster He was alone The past was dead, the future 
was unimaginab le What certainty had he that a single human creature now 
living was on his side? And what way of knowing that the dominion of the 
Party would not endure for ever> Like an answer, the three slogans on the 
white face of the Mimstry of Truth came back to him 

WAR IS PEACE 
FREEDOM IS SLAVERY 
IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH 

He took a twenty-five cent piece out of his pocket There, too, in tiny clear 
letterings the same slogans were inscribed, and on the other face of the coin the 
head of Big Brother Even from the com the eyes pursued you On coins, on 
stamps, on the covers of books, on banners, on posters, and on the wrappings 
of a cigarette packet-everywhere Always the eyes watching you and the voice 
enveloping you Asleep or awake, working or eating, indoors or out of doors, m 
the bath or m bed~no escape Nothing was your own except the few cubic 
centimetres inside your skull 

The sun had shifted round, and the myriad windows of the Ministry of 
Truth, with the light no longer shining on them, looked grim as the loopholes 
of a fortress His heart quailed before the enormous pyramidal shape It was 
too strong, it could not be stormed A thousand rocket bombs would not batter 
it down He wondered again for whom he was writing the diary For the future, 
for the past-for an age that might be imaginary And m front of him there lay 
not death but annihilation The diary would be reduced to ashes and himself to 
vapour Only the Thought Police would read what he had written, before they 
wiped it out of existence and out of memory How could you make appeal to 
the future when not a trace of you, not even an anonymous word scribbled on a 
piece of paper, could physically survive? 

The telescreen struck fourteen He must leave in ten minutes He had to be 
back at work by fourteen-thirty 

Curiously, the chiming of the hour seemed to have put new heart into him 
He was a lonely ghost uttering a truth that nobody would ever hear But so 
long as he uttered it, in some obscure way the continuity was not broken It 
was not by making yourself heard but by staying sane that you carried on the 
human heritage He went back to the table, dipped his pen, and wrote 


To the future or to the past, to a tune when thought is free, when men are different from one 
another and do not live alone-to a time when truth exists and what is done cannot be undone 
From the age of uniformity, from the age of solitude, from the age of Big Brother, from the age 
of doublethink-greetings} 

He was already dead, he reflected, It seemed to him that it was only now, 
when he had begun to be able to formulate his thoughts, that he had taken the 
decisive step. The consequences of every act are included m the act itself, He 
Wfote: 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 

Thoughtcnme does not entail death thoughtcnme is death 


759 


Now he had recognized himself as a dead man it became important to stay 
alive as long as possible Two fingers of his right hand were inkstained It was 
exactly the kind of detail that might betray you Some nosing zealot in the 
Ministry (a woman, probably someone like the little sandy-haired woman or 
the dark-haired girl from the Fiction Department) might start wondering why 
he had been writing during the lunch interval, why he had used an old- 
fashioned pen, what he had been wntmg-and then drop a hint m the 
appropriate quarter He went to the bathroom and carefully scrubbed the ink 
away with the gritty dark-brown soap which rasped your skin like sandpaper 
and was therefore well adapted for this purpose 
He put the diary away in the drawer It was quite useless to think of hiding 
it, but he could at least make sure whether or not its existence had been 
discovered A hair laid across the page-ends was too obvious With the tip of 
his finger he picked up an identifiable grain of whitish dust and deposited it on 
the corner of the cover, where it was bound to be shaken off if the book was 
moved 



Winston was dreaming of his mother 

He must, he thought, have been ten or eleven years old when his mother had 
disappeared She was a tall, statuesque, rather silent woman with slow 
movements and magnificent fair hair His father he remembered more vaguely 
as dark and thin, dressed always m neat dark clothes (Winston remembered 
especially the very thin soles of his father’s shoes) and wearing spectacles The 
two of them must evidently have been swallowed up in one of the first great 
purges of the ’fifties 

At this moment his mother was sitting m some place deep down beneath 
him, with his young sister in her arms He did not remember his sister at all, 
except as a tiny, feeble baby, always silent, with large, watchful eyes Both of 
them were looking up at him They were down m some subterranean 
place-the bottom of a well, for instance, or a very deep grave-but it was a 
place which, already far below him, was itself moving downwards They were 
in the saloon of a sinking ship, looking up at him through the darkening water 
There was still air in the saloon, they could still see him and he them, but all 
the while they were sinking down, down into the green waters which in 
another moment must hide them from sight for ever He was out in the light 
and air while they were being sucked down to death, and they were down there 
because he was up here He knew it and they knew it, and he could see the 



y6o Nineteen Eighty-Four 

knowledge in their faces There was no repoach either m their faces or m their 
hearts, only the knowledge that they must die in order that he might remain 
alive, and this was part of the unavoidable order of things 

He could not remember what had happened, but he knew in his dream that 
in some way the lives of his mother and his sister had been sacrificed to his 
own It was one of those dreams which, while retaining the characteristic 
dream scenery, are a continuation of one’s intellectual life, and m which one 
becomes aware of facts and ideas which still seem new and valuable after one is 
awake The thing that now suddenly struck Winston was that his mother’s 
death, nearly thirty years ago, had been tragic and sorrowful in a way that was 
no longer possible Tragedy, he perceived, belonged to the ancient time, to a 
time when there was still privacy, love, and friendship, and when the members 
of a family stood by one another without needing to know the reason His 
mother’s memory tore at his heart because she had died loving him, when he 
was too young and selfish to love her m return, and because somehow, he did 
not remember how, she had sacrificed herself to a conception of loyalty that 
was private and unalterable Such things, he saw, could not happen today 
Today there were fear, hatred, and pain, but no dignity of emotion, no deep or 
complex sorrows All this he seemed to see in the large eyes of his mother and 
his sister, looking up at him through the green water, hundreds of fathoms 
down and still sinking 

Suddenly he was standing on short springy turf, on a summer evening when 
the slanting rays of the sun gilded the ground The landscape that he was 
looking at recurred so often in his dreams that he was never fully certain 
whether or not he had seen it in the real world In his waking thoughts he 
called it the Golden Country It was an old, rabbit-bitten pasture, with a foot- 
track wandering across it and a molehill here and there In the ragged hedge on 
the opposite side of the field the boughs of the elm trees were swaying very 
faintly m the breeze, their leaves just stirring in dense masses like women’s 
hair Somewhere near at hand, though out of sight, there was a clear, slow- 
moving stream where dace were swimming in the pools under the willow trees 

The girl with dark hair was coming towards them across the field With what 
seemed a single movement she tore off her clothes and flung them disdainfully 
aside Her body was white and smooth, but it aroused no desire m him, indeed 
he barely looked at it What overwhelmed him in that instant was admiration 
for the gesture with which she had thrown her clothes aside With its grace and 
carelessness it seemed to annihilate a whole culture, a whole system of thought, 
as though Big Brother and the Party and the Thought Police could all be swept 
into nothingness by a single splendid movement of the arm That too was a 
gesture belonging to the ancient time Winston woke up with the world 
‘Shakespeare’ on his Ups 

The telescreen was giving forth an ear-splitting whistle which continued on 
the same note for thirty seconds It was nought seven fifteen, getting-up time 
for office workers Winston wrenched his body out of bed-naked, for a 
member of the Outer Party received only 3,000 clothing coupons annually, and 
a suit of pyjamas was 600-and seized a dingy singlet and a pair of shorts that 



Nineteen Eighty-F our 761 

were lying across a chair The Physical Jerks would begin m three minutes 
The next moment he was doubled up by a violent coughing fit which nearly 
always attacked him soon after waking up It emptied his lungs so completely 
that he could only begin breathing again by lying on his back and taking a 
series of deep gasps His veins had swelled with the effort of the cough, and the 
varicose ulcer had started itching 

‘Thirty to forty groups yapped a piercing female voice ‘Thirty to forty 
group 1 Take' your places, please Thirties to forties 1 ’ 

Winston sprang to attention in front of the telescreen, upon which the image 
of a youngish woman, scrawny but muscular, dressed in tunic and gym-shoes, 
had already appeared 

‘Arms bending and stretching* ’ she rapped out *T ake your time by me One , 
two, three, four* One, two, three, four* Come on, comrades, put a bit of life into 
it* One, two, three, four* One , two, three, four* ’ 

The pam of the coughing fit had not quite driven out of Winston’s mind the 
impression made by his dream, and the rhythmic movements of the exercise 
restored it somewhat As he mechanically shot his arms back and forth, 
wearing on his face the look of grim enjoyment which was considered proper 
during the Physical Jerks, he was struggling to think his way backward into the 
dim period of his early childhood It was extraordinarily difficult Beyond the 
late ’fifties everying faded When there were no external records that you could 
refer to, even the outline of your own life lost its sharpness You remembered 
huge events which had quite probably not happened, you remembered the 
detail of mcidents without being able to recapture their atmosphere, and there 
were long blank periods to which you could assign nothing Everything had 
been different then Even the names of countries, and their shapes on the map, 
had been different Airstrip One, for instance, had not been so called in those 
days it had been called England or Britain, though London, he felt fairly 
certain, had always been called London 
Winston could not definitely remember a time when his country had not 
been at war, but it was evident that there had been a fairly long interval of 
peace during his childhood, because one of his early memories was of an air 
raid which appeared to take everyone by surprise Perhaps it was the time 
when the atomic bomb had fallen on Colchester He did not remember the raid 
itself, but he did remember his father’s hand clutching his own as they hurried 
down, down, down into some place deep in the earth, round and round a spiral 
staircase which rang under his feet and which finally so wearied his legs that he 
began whimpering and they had to stop and rest His mother, in her slow, 
dreamy way, was following a long way behind them She was carrying his baby 
sister— or perhaps it was only a bundle of blankets that she was carrying he was 
not certain whether his sister had been born then. Finally they had emerged 
mto a noisy, crowded place which he had realized to be a Tube station 
There were people sitting all over the stone-flagged floor, and other people, 
packed tightly together, were sitting on metal bunks, one above the other, 
Winston and his mother and father found themselves a place on the floor, and 
near them an old man and an old woman were sitting side by side on a bunk 



7 62 Nineteen Eighty •‘Four 

The old man had on a decent dark suit and a black cloth cap pushed back from 
very white hair his face was scarlet and his eyes were blue and full of tears He 
reeked of gm It seemed to breathe out of his skm m place of sweat, and one 
could have fancied that the tears welling from his eyes were pure gm But 
though slightly drunk he was also suffering under some grief that was genuine 
and unbearable In his childish way Winston grasped that some terrible thing, 
something that was beyond forgiveness and could never be remedied, had just 
happened It also seemed to him that he knew what it was Someone whom the 
old man loved-a little granddaughter, perhaps-had been killed Every few 
minutes the old man kept repeating 

‘We didn’t ought to ’ave trusted ’em I said so, Ma, didn’t P That’s what 
comes of trusting ’em I said so all along We didn’t ought to ’ave trusted the 
buggers ’ 

But which buggers they didn’t ought to have trusted Winston could not now 
remember 

Since about that time, war had been literally continuous, though strictly 
speaking it had not always been the same war For several months during his 
childhood there had been confused street fighting m London itself, some of 
which he remembered vividly But to trace out the history of the whole period, 
to say who was fighting whom at any given moment, would have been utterly 
impossible, since no written record, and no spoken word, ever made mention 
of any other alignment than the existing one At this moment, for example, in 
1984 (if it was 1984), Oceania was at war with Eurasia and in alliance with 
Eastasia In no public or private utterance was it ever admitted that the three 
powers had at any time been grouped along different lines Actually, as 
Winston well knew, it was only four years since Oceania had been at war with 
Eastasia and in alliance with Eurasia But that was merely a piece of furtive 
knowledge which he happened to possess because his memory was not 
satisfactorily under control Officially the change of partners had never 
happened Oceania was at war with Eurasia therefore Oceania had always 
been at war with Eurasia The* enemy of the moment always represented 
absolute evil, and it followed that any past or future agreement with him was 
impossible 

The frightening thing, he reflected for the ten thousandth time as he forced 
his shoulders painfully backward (with hands on hips, they were gyrating their 
bodies from the waist, an exercise that was supposed to be good for the back 
muscles)-the frightening thing was that it might all be true If the Party could 
thrust its hand into the past and say of this or that event, it never 
happened-tha.t 3 surely, was more terrifying than mere torture and death? 

The Party said that Oceania had never been m alliance with Eurasia He, 
Winston Smith, knew that Oceania had been in alliance with Eurasia as short a 
time as four years ago But where did that knowledge exist? Only m his own 
consciousness, which in any case must soon be annihilated And if all others 
accepted ihe lie which the Party imposed-if all records told the same tale- then 
the he passed into history and became truth ‘Who controls the past,’ ran the 
Party slogan, ‘controls the future* who controls the present controls the past ’ 



Nineteen Eighty-Four jS 3 

And yet the past, though of its nature alterable, never had been altered 
Whatever was true now was true from everlastmg to everlasting It was quite 
simple All that was needed was an unending series of victories over your own 
memory ‘Reality control’, they called it m Newspeak, ‘doublethink’ 

‘Stand easy 1 ’ barked the instructress, a little more genially 
Winston sank his arms to his sides and slowly refilled his lungs with air His 
mmd slid away into the labyrinthine world of double-think To know and not 
to know, to be conscious of complete truthfulness while telling carefully 
constructed lies, to hold simultaneously two opinions which cancelled out, 
knowing them to be contradictory and believing in both of them, to use logic 
against logic, to repudiate morality while laying claim to it, to believe that 
democracy was impossible and that the Party was the guardian of democracy, 
to forget whatever it was necessary to forget, then to draw it back into memory 
again at the moment when it was needed, and then promptly to forget it again 
and above all, to apply the same process to the process itself That was the 
ultimate subtlety consciously to induce unconsciousness, and then, once 
again, to become unconscious of the act of hypnosis you had just performed 
Even to understand the world ‘doublethink’ involved the use of doublethink 
The instructress had called them to attention again ‘And now let’s see 
which of us can touch our toes 1 ’ she said enthusiastically ‘Right over from the 
hips, please, comrades One- two 1 One-two 1 ’ 

Winston loathed this exercise, which sent shooting pains all the way from his 
heels to his buttocks and often ended by bringing on another coughing fit The 
half-pleasant quality went out of his meditations The past, he reflected, had 
not merely been altered, it had been actually destroyed For how could you 
establish even the most obvious fact when there existed no record outside your 
own memory* He tried to remember in what year he had first heard mention of 
Big Brother He thought it must have been at some time in the ’sixties, but it 
was impossible to be certam In the Party histones, of course, Big Brother 
figured as the leader and guardian of the Revolution smce its very earliest days 
His exploits had been gradually pushed backwards m time until already they 
extended mto the fabulous world of the ’forties and the ’thirties, when the 
capitalists m their strange cylindrical hats still rode through the streets of 
London m great gleaming motor-cars or horse carriages with glass sides. 
There was no knowing how much of this legend was true and how much 
invented Winston could not even remember at what date the Party itself had 
come into existence He did not beheve he had ever heard the word Ingsoc 
before i960, but it was possible that in its Oldspeak form-‘English Socialism’, 
that is to say-it had been current earlier, Everything melted into mist 
Sometimes, indeed, you could put your finger on a definite he It was not true, 
for example, as was claimed in the Party history books, that the Party had 
invented aeroplanes He remembered aeroplanes smce his earliest childhood 
But you could prove nothing There was never any evidence Just once in his 
whole life he had held m his hands unmistakable documentary proof of the 
falsification of an historical fact And on that occasion- 
‘ Smith’’ screamed the shrewish voice from the telescreen ‘6079 Smith W 1 



J64 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

Yes 3 you' Bend lower, please’ You can do better than that You’re not trying 
Lower, please’ That’s better, comrade Now stand at ease, the whole squad, 
and watch me 5 

A sudden hot sweat had broken out all over Winston’s body His face 
remained completely inscrutable Never show dismay’ Never show 
resentment’ A single flicker of the eyes could give you away He stood 
watching while the instructress raised her arms above her head and-one could 
not say gracefully, but with remarkable neatness and efficiency-bent over and 
tucked the first joint of her fingers under her toes 

'There, comrades’ That’s how I want to see you doing it Watch me again 
I’m thirty-nine and I’ve had four children Now look ’ She bent over again 
‘You see my knees aren’t bent You can all do it if you want to,’ she added as she 
straightened herself up ‘Anyone under forty-five is perfectly capable of 
touching his toes We don’t all have the privilege of fighting m the front line, 
but at least we can all keep fit Remember our boys on the Malabar front’ And 
the sailors m the Floating Fortresses’ Just think what they have to put up with 
Now try again That’s better, comrade, that’s much better,’ she added 
encouragingly as Winston, with a violent lunge, succeeded in touching his toes 
with knees unbent, for the first time m several years 


4 


With the deep, unconscious sigh which not even the nearness of the telescreen 
could prevent him from uttering when his day’s work started, Winston pulled 
the speakwnte towards him, blew the dust from its mouthpiece, and put on his 
spectacles Then he unrolled and clipped together four small cylinders of 
paper which had already flopped out of the pneumatic tube on the right-hand 
side of his desk 

In the walls of the cubicle there were three orifices To the right of the 
speakwnte, a small pneumatic tube for written messages, to the left, a larger 
one of newspapers, and m the side wall, within easy reach of Winston’s arm, a 
large oblong slit protected by a wire grating This last was for the disposal of 
waste paper* Similar slits existed in thousands or tens of thousands throughout 
the building, not only in every room but at short intervals in every corridor 
For some reason they were nicknamed memory holes When one knew that any 
document was due for destruction, or even when one saw a scrap of waste 
paper lying about, it was an automatic action to lift the flap of the nearest 
memory hole and drop it in, whereupon it would be whirled away on a current 
of warm air to the enormous furnaces which were hidden somewhere m the 
recesses of the building 

Winston examined the four slips of paper which he had unrolled Each 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 765 

contained a message of only one or two lines, m the abbreviated ;argon-not 
actually Newspeak, but consisting largely of Newspeak words-which was 
used in the Ministry for internal purposes They ran 

times 173 84 bb speech malreported afnca rectify 

times 19 12 83 forecasts 3 yp 4th quarter 83 misprints verify current issue 

times 14 2 84 miniplenty malquoted chocolate rectify 

times 3 12 83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs unpersons rewrite fullwise upsub 
antefiling 

With a faint feeling of satisfaction Winston laid the fourth message aside It 
was an intricate and responsible job and had better be dealt with last The 
other three were routine matters, though the second one one would probably 
mean some tedious wading through lists of figures 

Winston dialled ‘back numbers’ on the telescreen and called for the 
appropriate issues of The Times, which slid out of the pneumatic tube after 
only a few minutes’ delay The message he had received referred to articles or 
news-items which for one reason or another it was thought necessary to alter, 
or, as the official phrase had it, to rectify For example, it appeared from The 
Times of the seventeenth of March that Big Brother, m his speech of the 
previous day, had predicted that the South Indian front would remain quiet 
but that a Eurasian offensive would shortly be launched m North Africa As it 
happened, the Eurasian Higher Command had launched its offensive in South 
India and left North Africa alone It was therefore necessary to rewrite a 
paragraph of Big Brother’s speech, in such a way as to make him predict the 
thing that had actually happened Or again, The Times of the nineteenth of 
December had published the official forecasts of the output of various classes 
of consumption goods in the fourth quarter of 1983, which was also the sixth 
quarter of the Ninth Three-Year Plan Today’s issue contained a statement of 
the actual output, from which it appeared that the forecasts were in every 
instance grossly wrong Winston’s job was to rectify the original figures by 
making them agree with the later ones As for the third message, it referred to a 
very simple error which could be set right in a couple of minutes As, short a 
time ago as February, the Ministry of Plenty had issued a promise (a 
‘categorical pledge’ were the official words) that there would be no reduction of 
the chocolate ration during 1984 Actually, as Winston was aware, the 
chocolate ration was to be reduced from thirty grammes to twenty at the end of 
the present week All that was needed was to substitute for the original promise 
a warning that it would probably be necessary to reduce the ration at some time 
m April 

As soon as Wmston had dealt with each of the messages, he clipped his 
speakwritten corrections to the appropriate copy of The Times and pushed 
them into the pneumatic tubd Then, with a movement which was as nearly as 
possible unconscious, he crumpled up the original message and any notes that 
he himself had made, and dropped them into the memory hole to be devoured 
by the flames 



7 <56 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

What happened in the unseen labyrinth to which the pneumatic tubes led, 
he did not know in detail, but he did know m general terms As soon as all the 
corrections which happened to be necessary m any particular number of The 
Times had been assembled and collated, that number would be reprinted, the 
original copy destroyed, and the corrected copy placed on the files in its stead 
This process of continuous alteration was applied not only to newspapers, but 
to books, periodicals, pamphlets, posters, leaflets, films, sound-tracks, 
cartoons, photographs-to every kind of literature or documentation which 
might conceivably hold any political or ideological significance Day by day 
and almost minute by minute the past was brought up to date In this way 
every prediction made by the Party could be shown by documentary evidence 
to have been correct, nor was any item of news, or any expression of opimon, 
which conflicted with the needs of the moment, ever allowed to remain on 
record All history was a palimpsest, scraped clean and reinscribed exactly as 
often as was necessary In no case would it have been possible, once the deed 
was done, to prove that any falsification had taken place The largest section of 
the Records Department, tar larger than the one on which Winston worked, 
consisted simply of persons whose duty it was to track down and collect all 
copies of books, newspapers, and other documents which had been superseded 
and were due for destruction A number of The Times which might, because of 
changes in political alignment, or mistaken prophecies uttered by Big Brother, 
have been rewritten a dozen times still stood on the files bearing its original 
date, and no other copy existed to contradict it Books, also, were recalled and 
rewitten again and again, and were invariably reissued without any admission 
that any alteration had been made Even the written mstructions which 
Winston received, and which he invariably got rid of as soon as he had dealt 
with them, never stated or implied that an act of forgery was to be committed 
always the reference was to slips, errors, misprints, or misquotations which it 
was necessary to put right in the interests of accuracy 

But actually, he thought as he readjusted the Ministry of Plenty’s figures, it 
was not even forgery It was merely the substitution ofione piece of nonsense 
for another Most of the material that you were dealing with had no connexion 
with anything m the real world, not even the kind of connexion that is 
contained in a direct lie Statistics were just as much a fantasy in their original 
version as in their rectified version A great deal of the time you were expected 
to make them up out of your head For example, the Ministry of Plenty’s 
forecast had estimated the output of boots for the quarter at 145 million pairs 
The actual output was given as sixty-two millions Winston, however, in 
rewriting the forecast, marked the figure down to fifty-seven millions, so as to 
allow for the usual claim that the quota had been overfulfilled In any case, 
sixty-two millions was no nearer the truth than fifty-seven millions, or than 
*f 45 millions. Yery likely no boots had been produced at all Likelier still, 
ifehody knew how many had been produced, much less cared All one knew 
v^.,that every quarter astronomical numbers of boots were produced on 
pafet', while perhaps half the population of Oceania went barefoot And so it 
Was with every class of recorded fact, great or small Everything faded away 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 767 

into a shadow-world m which, finally, even the date of the year had become 
uncertain 

Winston glanced across the hall In the corresponding cubicle on the other 
side a small, precise-looking, dark-chmned man named Tillotson was working 
steadily away, with a folded newspaper-on his knee and his mouth very close to 
the mouthpiece of the speakwrite He had the air of trying to keep what he was 
saying a secret between himself and the telescreen He looked up, and his 
spectacles darted a hostile flash in Winston’s direction 

Winston hardly knew Tillotson, and had no idea what work he was 
employed on People in the Records Department did not readily talk about 
their jobs In the long, wmdowless hall, with its double row of cubicles and its 
endless rustle of papers and hum of voices murmuring into speakwntes, there 
were qmte a dozen people whom Winston did not even know by name, though 
he daily saw them hurrying to and fro m the corridors or gesticulating in the 
Two Mmutes Hate He knew that m the cubicle next to him the little woman 
with sandy hair toiled day in day out, simply at tracking down and deleting 
from the Press the names of people who had been vaporized and were therefore 
considered never to have existed There was a certain fitness in this, since her 
own husband had been vaporized a couple of years earlier And a few cubicles 
away a mild, ineffectual, dreamy creature named Ampleforth, with very hairy 
ears and a surprising talent for juggling with rhymes and metres, was engaged 
in producing garbled versions-defimtive texts, they were called-of poems 
which had become ideologically offensive, but which for one reason or another 
were to be retained m the anthologies And this hall, with its fifty workers or 
thereabouts, was only one sub-section, a single cell, as it were, m the huge 
complexity of the Records Department Beyond, above, below, were other 
swarms of workers engaged m an unimaginable multitude of jobs There were 
the huge printing-shops with their sub-editors, their typography experts, and 
their elaborately equipped studios for the faking of photographs There was 
the tele-programmes section with its engineers, its producers, and its teams of 
actors specially chosen for their skill in imitating voices There were the armies 
of reference clerks whose job was simply to draw up lists of books and 
periodicals which were due for recall There were the vast repositories where 
the corrected documents were stored, and the hidden furnaces where the 
ongmal copies were destroyed And somewhere or other, quite anonymous, 
there were the directing brains who co-ordinated the whole effort and laid 
down the lines of policy which made it necessary that this fragment of the past 
should be preserved, that one falsified, and the other rubbed out of existence. 

And the Records Department, after all, was itself only a smgle branch of the 
Ministry of Truth, whose primary job was not to reconstruct the past but to 
supply the citizens of Oceania with newspapers, films, textbooks, telescreen 
programmes, plays, novels-with every conceivable kind of information, 
instruction, or entertainment, from a statue to a slogan, from a lyric poem tq a 
biological treatise, and from a child’s spelling-book to a Newspeak dictionary 
And the Ministry had not only to supply the multifarious needs of the Party, 
but also to repeat the whole operation at a lower level for the benefit of the 



y68 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

proletariat There was a whole chain of separate departments dealing with 
proletarian literature, music, drama, and entertainment generally Here were 
produced rubbishy newspapers containing almost nothing except sport, 
crime, and astrology, sensational five-cent novelettes, films oozing with sex, 
and sentimental songs which were composed entirely by mechanical means on 
a special kind of kaleidoscope known as a versificator There was even a whole 
sub-section-Porwosec, it was called in Newspeak-engaged m producing the 
lowest kind of pornography, which was sent out in sealed packets and which no 
Party member, other than those who worked on it, was permitted to look at 

Three messages had slid out of the pneumatic tube while Winston was 
working, but they were simple matters, and he had disposed of them before the 
Two Minutes Hate interrupted him When the Hate was over he returned to 
his cubicle, took the Newspeak dictionary from the shelf, pushed the 
speakwrite to one side, cleaned his spectacles, and settled down to his mam job 
of the morning 

Winston’s greatest pleasure m life was in his work Most of it was a tedious 
routine, but included in it there were also jobs so difficult and intricate that you 
could lose yourself m them as m the depths of a mathematical 
problem-delicate pieces of forgery m which you had nothing to guide you 
except your knowledge of the principles of Ingsoc and your estimate of what 
the Party wanted you to say Winston was good at this kmd of thing On 
occasion he had even been entrusted with the rectification of The Times leading 
articles, which were written entirely in Newspeak He unrolled the message 
that he had set aside earlier It ran 


tunes 3 12 83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs unpersons rewrite fullwise upsub 
antefiling 

In Oldspeak (or standard English) this might be rendered 

The reporting of Big Brother’s Order for the Day in The Times of December 3rd 1983 is 
extremely unsatisfactory and makes references to non-existent persons Rewrite it in full and 
submit your draft to higher authority before filing 

Winston read through the offending article Big Brother’s Order for the 
Day, it seemed, had been chiefly devoted to praising the work of an 
organization known as ffcc, which supplied cigarettes and other comforts to 
the sailors in the Floating Fortresses A certain Comrade Withers, a prominent 
member of the Inner Party, had been smgled out for special mention and 
awarded a decoration, the Order of Conspicuous Merit, Second Class 
Three months later FFechad suddenly been dissolved with no reasons given. 
One could assume that Withers and his associates were now in disgrace, but 
there had beetrno report of the matter in the Press or on the telescreen That 
was to be expected, since it was unusual for political offenders to be put on trial 
or even publicly denounced The great purges involving thousands of people, 
with public trials of traitors and thought-criminals who made abject 
confession of their crimes and were afterwards executed, were special show- 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 769 

pieces not occurring oftener than once in a couple of years More commonly, 
people who had incurred the displeasure of the Party simply disappeared and 
were never heard of again One never had the smallest clue as to what had 
happened to them In some cases they might not even be dead Perhaps thirty 
people personally known to Wmston, not counting his parents, had 
disappeared at one time or another 

Winston stroked his nose gently with a paper-clip In the cubicle across the 
way Comrade Tillotson was still crouching secretively over his speakwnte He 
raised his head for a moment again the hostile spectacle-flash Wmston 
wondered whether Comrade Tillotson was engaged on the same job as himself 
It was perfectly possible So tricky a piece of work would never be entrusted to 
a single person on the other hand, to turn it over to a committee would be to 
admit openly that an act of fabrication was taking place Very likely as many as 
a dozen people were now working away on rival versions of what Big Brother 
had actually said And presently some master brain m the Inner Party would 
select this version or that, would re-edit it and set m motion the complex 
processes of cross-referencmg that would be required, and then the chosen lie 
would pass into the permanent records and become truth 

Wmston did not know why Withers had been disgraced Perhaps it was for 
corruption or incompetence Perhaps Big Brother was merely getting rid of a 
too-popular subordinate Perhaps Withers or someone close to him had been 
suspected of heretical tendencies Or perhaps-what was likeliest of all-the 
thing had simply happened because purges and vaporizations were a necessary 
part of the mechanics of government The only real clue lay m the words ‘refs 
unpersons’, which indicated that Withers was already dead You could not 
invariably assume this to be the case when people were arrested Sometimes 
they were released and allowed to remain at liberty for as much as a year or two 
years before being executed Very occasionally some person whom you had 
believed dead long since would make a ghostly reappearance at some public 
trial where he would implicate hundreds of others by his testimony before 
vanishing, this time for ever Withers, however, was already an unperson He 
did not exist he had never existed Winston decided that it would not be 
enough simply to reverse the tendency of Big Brother’s speech It was better to 
make it deal with something totally unconnected with its original subject 

He might turn the speech into the usual denunciation of traitors and 
thought-criminals, but that was a little too obvious, while to invent a victory at 
the front, or some triumph of over-production m the Ninth Three-Year Plan, 
might complicate the records too much What was needed was a piece of pure 
fantasy Suddenly there sprang into his mind, ready made as it were, the image 
of a certain Comrade Ogilvy, who had recently died m battle, in heroic 
circumstances There were occasions when Big Brother devoted his Order for 
the Day to commemorating some humble, rank-and-file Party member whose 
life and death he held up as an example worthy to be foil wed. Today he 
should commemorate Comrade Ogilvy It was true that there was no such 
person as Comrade Ogilvy, but a few lines of print and a couple of faked 
photographs would soon bring him into existence 



770 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

Winston thought for a moment, then pulled the speakwnte towards him and 
began dictating in Big Brother’s familiar style a style at once military and 
pedantic, and, because of a trick of asking questions and then promptly 
answering them (‘What lessons do we learn from this fact, comrades^ The 
lesson-which is also one of the fundamental principles of Ingsoc-that,’ etc , 
etc ), easy to imitate 

At the age of three Comrade Ogilvy had refused all toys except a drum, a 
sub-machine gun, and a model helicopter At six-a year early, by a special 
relaxation of the rules-he had joined the Spies, at nine he had been a troop 
leader At eleven he had denounced his uncle to the Thought Police after 
overhearing a conversation which appeared to him to have criminal 
tendencies At seventeen he had been a district organizer of the Junior Anti- 
Sex League At nineteen he had designed a hand-grenade which had been 
adopted by the Ministry of Peace and which, at its first trial, had killed thirty- 
one Eurasian prisoners m one burst At twenty-three he had perished m 
action Pursued by enemy jet planes while flying over the Indian Ocean with 
important despatches, he had weighted his body with his machine-gun and 
leapt out of the helicopter into deep water, despatches and all-an end, said Big 
Brother, which it was impossible to contemplate without feelings of envy Big 
Brother added a few remarks on the purity and singlemindedness of Comrade 
Ogilvy’s life He was a total abstainer and a non-smoker, had no recreations 
except a daily hour m the gymnasium, and had taken a vow of celibacy, 
believing marriage and the care of a family to be incompatible with a twenty- 
four-hour-a-day devotion to duty He had no subjects of conversation except 
the principles of Ingsoc, and no aim m life except the defeat of the Eurasian 
enemy and the hunting-down of spies, saboteurs, thought-criminals, and 
traitors generally 

Winston debated with himself whether to award Comrade Ogilvy the Order 
of Conspicuous Merit in the end he decided against it because of the 
unnecessary cross-referencmg that it would entail 

Once again he glanced at his rival m the opposite cubicle Something seemed 
to tell him with certainty that Tillotson was busy on the same job as himself 
There was no way of knowing whose job would finally be adopted, but he felt a 
profound conviction that it would be his own Comrade Ogilvy, ummagmed 
an hour ago, was now a fact It struck him as curious that you could create dead 
men but not living ones. Comrade Ogilvy, who had never existed in the 
present, now existed m the past, and when once the act of forgery was 
forgotten, he would exist just as authentically, and upon the same evidence, as 
Charlemagne or Julius Caesar 



5 


In the low-ceilmged canteen, deep underground, the lunch queue jerked 
slowly forward The room was already very full and deafenmgly noisy From 
the grille at the counter the steam of stew came pouring forth, with a sour 
metallic smell which did not quite overcome the fumes of Victory Gm On the 
far side of the room there was a small bar, a mere hole m the wall, where gm 
could be bought at ten cents the large nip 

‘Just the man I was looking for,’ said a voice at Winston’s back 
He turned round It was his friend Syme, who worked in the Research 
Department Perhaps ‘friend’ was not exactly the right word You did not have 
friends nowadays, you had comrades but there were some comrades whose 
society was pleasanter than that of others Syme was a philologist, a specialist 
m Newspeak Indeed, he was one of the enormous team of experts now 
engaged m compiling the Eleventh Edition of the Newspeak Dictionary He 
was a tiny creature, smaller than Winston, with dark hair and large, 
protuberant eyes, at once mournful and derisive, which seemed to search your 
face closely while he was speaking to you 

‘I wanted to ask you whether you’d got any razor blades,’ he said 
‘Not one 1 ’ said Winston with a sort of guilty haste ‘I’ve tried all over the 
place They don’t exist any longer ’ 

Everyone kept asking you for razor blades Actually he had two unused ones 
which he was hoarding up There had been a famine of them for months past 
At any given moment there was some necessary article which the Party shops 
were unable to supply Sometimes it was buttons, sometimes it was darning 
wool, sometimes it was shoelaces, at present it was razor blades You could 
only get hold of them, if at all, by scrounging more or less furtively on the ‘free’ 
market 

‘I’ve been using the same blade for six weeks,’ he added untruthfully 
The queue gave another jerk forward As they halted he turned and faced 
Syme again Each of them took a greasy metal tray from a pile at the edge of the 
counter 

‘Did you go and see the prisoners hanged yesterday’’ said Syme 
‘I was working,’ said Winston indifferently ‘I shall see it on the flicks, I 
suppose ’ 

‘A very inadequate substitute,’ said Syme 

His mocking eyes roved over Winston’s face ‘I know you,’ the eyes seemed 
to say, ‘I see through you I know very well why you didn’t go to see those 



772 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

prisoners hanged 5 In an intellectual way, Syme was venomously orthodox He 
would talk with a disagreeable gloating satisfaction of helicopter raids on 
enemy villages, the trials and confessions of thought-criminals, the executions 
in the cellars of the Ministry of Love Talking to him was largely a matter of 
getting him away from such subjects and entangling him, if possible, m the 
technicalities of Newspeak, on which he was authoritative and interesting 
Winston turned his head a little aside to avoid the scrutiny of the large dark 
eyes 

‘It was a good hanging,’ said Syme reminiscently ‘I think it spoils it when 
they tie their feet together I like to see them kicking And above all, at the end, 
the tongue sticking right out, and blue-a quite bright blue That’s the detail 
that appeals to me ’ 

‘Nex’, please 1 ’ yelled the white-aproned prole with the ladle 

Wmston and Syme pushed their trays beneath the grille On to each was 
dumped swiftly the regulation lunch-a metal pannikin of pmkish-grey stew, a 
hunk of bread, a cube of cheese, a mug of milkless Victory Coffee, and one 
saccharine tablet 

‘There’s a table over there, under that telescreen,’ said Syme ‘Let’s pick up 
a gin on the way ’ 

The gm was served out to them in handleless china mugs They threaded 
their way across the crowded room and unpacked their trays on to the metal- 
topped table, on one corner of which someone had left a pool of stew, a filthy 
liquid mess that had the appearance of vomit Wmston took up his mug of gm, 
paused for an instant to collect his nerve, and gulped the oily-tastmg stuff 
down When he had winked the tears out of his eyes he suddenly discovered 
that he was hungry He began swallowing spoonfuls of the stew, which, m 
among its general sloppiness, had cubes of spongy pinkish stuff which was 
probably a preparation of meat Neither of them spoke again till they had 
emptied their pannikins. From the table at Winston’s left, a little behind his 
back, someone was talking rapidly and continuously, a harsh gabble almost 
like the quacking of a duck, which pierced the general uproar of the room 

‘How is the Dictionary getting on’’ said Wmston, raising his voice to 
overcome the noise 

‘Slowly,’ said Syme ‘I’m on the adjectives It’s fascinating ’ 

He had brightened up immediately at the mention of Newspeak He pushed 
his pannikin aside, took up his hunk of bread in one delicate hand and his 
cheese in the other, and leaned across the table so as to be able to speak without 
shouting 

‘The Eleventh Edition is the definitive edition,’ he said ‘We’re getting the 
language into its final shape- the shape it’s going to have when nobody speaks 
anything else When we’ve finished with it, people like you will have to learn it 
all over again You think, I dare say, that our chief job is inventing new words 
But not a bit of it! We’re destroying words-scores of them, hundreds of them, 
every day We’re cutting the language down to the bone The Eleventh Edition 
won’t contain a single word that will become obsolete before the year 2050 ’ 

He hit hungrily into his bread and swallowed a couple of mouthfuls, then 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 77 3 

continued speaking, with a sort of pedant’s passion His thm dark face had 
become animated, his eyes had lost their mocking expression and grown 
almost dreamy 

‘It’s a beautiful thing, the destruction of words Of course the great wastage 
is in the verbs and adjectives, but there are hundreds of nouns that can be got 
rid of as well It isn’t only the synonyms, there are also the antonyms After all, 
what justification is there for a word which is simply the opposite of some other 
word? A word contains its opposite in itself Take “good”, for instance If you 
have a word like “good”, what need is there for a word like “bad”? “Ungood” 
will do just as well-better, because it’s an exact opposite, which the other is 
not Or again, if you want a stronger version of “good”, what sense is there in 
having a whole string of vague useless words like “excellent” and “splendid” 
and all the rest of them? “Plusgood” covers the meaning, or “doubleplus- 
good” if you want something stronger still Of course we use those forms 
already, but m the final version of Newspeak there’ll be nothing else In the 
end the whole notion of goodness and badness will be covered by only six 
words-m reality, only one word Don’t you see the beauty of that, Winston? It 
was BB’s idea originally, of course,’ he added as an afterthought 

A sort of vapid eagerness flitted across Winston’s face at the mention of Big 
Brother Nevertheless Syme immediately detected a certain lack of 
enthusiasm. 

‘You haven’t a real appreciation of Newspeak, Winston,’ he said almost 
sadly ‘Even when you write it you’re still thinking in Oldspeak I’ve read some 
of those pieces that you write m The Times occasionally They’re good enough, 
but they’re translations In your heart you’d prefer to stick to Oldspeak, with 
all its vagueness and its useless shades of meaning You don’t grasp the beauty 
of the destruction of words Do you know that Newspeak is the only language 
in the world whose vocabulary gets smaller every year?’ 

Winston did know that, of course He smiled, sympathetically he hoped, not 
trusting himself to speak Syme bit off another fragment of the dark-coloured 
bread, chewed it briefly, and went on 

‘Don’t you see that the whole aim of Newspeak is to narrow the range of 
thought? In the end we shall make thoughtcrime literally impossible, because 
there will be no words m which to express it Every concept that can ever be 
needed, will be expressed by exactly one word, with its meaning rigidly defined 
and all its subsidiary meanings rubbed out and forgotten Already, m the 
Eleventh Edition, we’re not far from that point But the process will still be 
continuing long after you and I are dead Every year fewer and fewer words, 
and the range of consciousness always a little smaller Even now, of course, 
there’s no reason or excuse for committing thoughtcrime It’s merely a 
question of self-discipline, reality-control But m the end there won’t be any 
need even for that The Revolution will be complete when the language is 
perfect Newspeak is Ingsoc and Ingsoc is Newspeak,’ he added with a sort of 
mystical satisfaction ‘Has it ever occurred to you, Winston, that by the year 
2050, at the very latest, not a single human being will be alive who could 
understand such a conversation as we are having now?’ 



774 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

‘Except- 5 began Winston doubtfully, and then stopped 

It had been on the tip of his tongue to say ‘Except the proles 5 , but he checked 
himself, not feeling fully certain that this remark was not m some way 
unorthodox Syme, however, had divined what he was about to say 

‘The proles are not human beings, 5 he said carelessly ‘By 2050-earlier, 
probably-all real knowledge of Oldspeak will have disappeared The whole 
literature of the past will have been destroyed Chaucer, Shakespeare, Milton, 
Byron-they’ll exist only in Newspeak versions, not merely changed into 
something different, but actually changed into something contradictory of 
what they used to be Even the literature of the Party will change Even the 
slogans will change How could you have a slogan like “freedom is slavery” 
when the concept of freedom has been abolished^ The whole climate of 
thought will be different In fact there will be no thought, as we understand it 
now Orthodoxy means not thmkmg-not needing to think Orthodoxy is 
unconsciousness 5 

One of these days, thought Winston with sudden deep conviction, Syme will 
be vaporized He is too intelligent He sees too clearly and speaks too plainly 
The Party does not like such people One day he will disappear It is written in 
his face 

Winston had finished his bread and cheese He turned a little sideways m his 
chair to drink his mug of coffee At the table on his left the man with the 
strident voice was still talking remorselessly away A young woman who was 
perhaps his secretary, and who was sitting with her back to Winston, was 
listening to him and seemed to be eagerly agreeing with everything that he 
said From time to time Winston caught some such remarks as ‘I think you’re 
so right, I do so agree with you 5 , uttered m a youthful and rather silly femimne 
voice But the other voice never stopped for an instant, even when the girl was 
speaking Wmston knew the man by sight, though he knew no more about him 
than that he held some important post m the Fiction Department He was a 
man of about thirty, with a muscular throat and a large, mobile mouth His 
head was thrown back a little, and because of the angle at which he was sitting, 
his spectacles caught the light and presented to Winston two blank discs 
instead of eyes What was slightly horrible, was that from the stream of sound 
that poured out of his mouth it was almost impossible to distinguish a single 
word Just once Winston caught a phrase- ‘complete and final elimination of 
Goldsteimsm’ -jerked out very rapidly and, as it seemed, all m one piece, like a 
line of type cast solid For the rest it was just a noise, a quack-quack-quacking 
And yet, though you could not actually hear what the man was saying, you 
could not be in any doubt about its general nature He might be denouncing 
Goldstein and demanding sterner measures against thought-criminals and 
saboteurs, he might be fulminating against the atrocities of the Eurasian army, 
he might be praising Big Brother or the heroes on the Malabar front-it made 
no difference Whatever it was, you could be certain that every word of it was 
pure orthodoxy, pure Ingsoc As he watched the eyeless face with the jaw 
moving rapidly up and down, Winston had a curious feeling that this was not a 
real human being but some kind of dummy It was not the man’s brain that was 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 775 

speaking, it was his larynx The stuff that was coming out of him consisted of 
words, but it was not speech m the true sense it was a noise uttered m 
unconsciousness, like the quacking of a duck 

Syme had fallen silent for a moment, and with the handle of his spoon was 
tracing patterns in the puddle of stew The voice from the other table quacked 
rapidly on, easily audible m spite of the surrounding din 

‘There is a word in Newspeak,’ said Syme, ‘I don’t know whether you know 
it duckspeak, to quack like a duck It is one of those interesting words that have 
two contradictory meanings Applied to an opponent, it is abuse, applied to 
someone you agree with, it is praise ’ 

Unquestionably Syme will be vaporized, Winston thought again He 
thought it with a kind of sadness, although well knowing that Syme despised 
him and slightly disliked him, and was fully capable of denouncing him as a 
thought-criminal if he saw any reason for doing so There was something 
subtly wrong with Syme There was something that he lacked discretion, 
aloofness, a sort of saving stupidity You could not say that he was unorthodox 
He believed in the principles of Ingsoc, he venerated Big Brother, he rejoiced 
over victories, he hated heretics, not merely with sincerity but with a sort of 
restless zeal, an up-to-dateness of information, which the ordinary Party 
member did not approach Yet a faint air of disreputability always clung to 
him He said things that would have been better unsaid, he had read too many 
books, he frequented the Chestnut Tree Cafe, haunt of painters and 
musicians There was no law, not even an unwritten law, against frequenting 
the Chestnut Tree Cafe, yet the place was somehow ill-omened The old, 
discredited leaders of the Party had been used to gather there before they were 
finally purged Goldstein himself, it was said, had sometimes been seen there, 
years and decades ago Syme’s fate was not difficult to foresee And yet it was a 
fact that if Syme grasped, even for three seconds, the nature of his, Winston’s, 
secret opinions, he would betray him instantly to the Thought Police So 
would anybody else, for that matter but Syme more than most Zeal was not 
enough Orthodoxy was unconsciousness 

Syme looked up ‘Here comes Parsons,’ he said. 

Something m the tone of his voice seemed to add, ‘that bloody fool’ 
Parsons, Winston’s fellow tenant at Victory Mansions, was m fact threading 
his way across the room-a tubby, middle-sized man with fair hair and a 
froglike face At thirty-five he was already putting on rolls of fat at neck and 
waistline, but his movements were brisk and boyish His whole appearance 
was that of a little boy grown large, so much so that although he was wearing 
the regulation overalls, it was almost impossible not to think of him as being 
dressed m the blue shorts, grey shirt, and red neckerchief of the Spies In 
visualizing him one saw always a picture of dimpled knees and sleeves rolled 
back from pudgy forearms Parsons did, indeed, invariably revert to shorts 
when a community hike or any other physical activity gave him an excuse for 
doing so He greeted them both with a cheery ‘Hullo, hullo 1 ’ and sat down at 
the table, giving, off an intense smell of sweat Beads of moisture stood out all 
over his pink face, His powers of sweating were extraordinary, At the 



776 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

Community Centre you could always tell when he had been playing table- 
tennis by the dampness of the bat handle Syme had produced a strip of paper 
on which there was a long column of words, and was studying it with an mk- 
pencil between his fingers 

‘Look at him working away m the lunch hour,’ said Parsons, nudging 
Winston ‘Keenness, eh? What’s that you’ve got there, old boy? Something a 
bit too brainy for me, I expect Smith, old boy, I’ll tell you why I’m chasing 
you It’s that sub you forgot to give me ’ 

‘Which sub is that?’ said Winston, automatically feeling for money About a 
quarter of one’s salary had to be earmarked for voluntary subscriptions, which 
were so numerous that it was difficult to keep track of them 

‘For Hate Week You know-the house-by-house fund I’m treasurer for our 
block We’re making an all-out effort-going to put on a tremendous show I 
tell you, it won’t be my fault if old Victory Mansions doesn’t have the biggest 
outfit of flags m the whole street Two dollars you promised me ’ 

Winston found and handed over two creased and filthy notes, which Parsons 
entered m a small notebook, m the neat handwriting of the illiterate 
‘By the way, old boy,’ he said ‘I hear that little beggar of mine let fly at you 
with his catapult yesterday I gave him a good dressing-down for it In fact I 
told him I’d take the catapult away if he does it again ’ 

‘I think he was a little upset at not going to the execution,’ said Winston 
‘Ah, well- what I mean to say, shows the right spirit, doesn’t it? Mischievous 
little beggars they are, both of them, but talk about keenness 1 All they think 
about is the Spies, and the war, of course D’you know what that little girl of 
mme did last Saturday, when her troop was on a hike out Berkhamsted way? 
She got two other girls to go with her, slipped off from the hike, and spent the 
whole afternoon following a strange man They kept on his tail for two hours, 
right through the woods, and then, when they got into Amersham, handed him 
over to the patrols ’ 

‘What did they do that for?’ said Wmston, somewhat taken aback Parson 
went on triumphantly 

‘My kid made sure he was some kind of enemy agent-might have been 
dropped by parachute, for instance But here’s the point, old boy What do you 
think put her on to him in the first place? She spotted he was wearing a funny 
kmd of shoes-said she’d never seen anyone wearing shoes like that before So 
the chances were he was a foreigner Pretty smart for a nipper of seven, eh?’ 
‘What happened to the man?’ said Wmston 

‘Ah, that I couldn’t say, of course But I wouldn’t be altogether surprised 
if-’ Parsons made the motion of aiming a rifle, and clicked his tongue for the 
explosion 

‘Good,’ said Syme abstractedly, without looking up from his strip of paper 
‘Of course we can’t afford to take chances,’ agreed Winston dutifully 
‘What I mean to say, there is a war on,’ said Parsons 
As though in confirmation of this, a trumpet call floated from the telescreen 
‘Just above their heads However, it was not the proclamation of a military 
victory this time, but merely an announcement from the Ministry of Plenty, 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 777 

‘Comrades 1 ’ cried an eager youthful voice ‘Attention, comrades* We have 
glorious news for you We have won the battle for production 1 Returns now 
completed of the output of all classes of consumption goods show that the 
standard of living has risen by no less than 20 per cent over the past year All 
over Oceania this morning there were irrepressible spontaneous de- 
monstrations when workers marched out of factories and offices and paraded 
through the streets with banners voicing their gratitude to Big Brother for the 
new, happy life which his wise leadership has bestowed upon us Here are 
some of the completed figures Foodstuffs -’ 

The phrase ‘our new, happy life’ recurred several times It had been a 
favourite of late with the Ministry of Plenty Parsons, his attention caught by 
the trumpet call, sat listening with a sort of gaping solemnity, a sort of edified 
boredom He could not follow the figures, but he was aware that they were in 
some way a cause for satisfaction He had lugged out a huge and filthy pipe 
which was already half full of charred tobacco With the tobacco ration at 100 . 
grammes a week it was seldom possible to fill a pipe up to the top Winston was 
smoking a Victory Cigarette which he held carefully horizontal The new 
ration did not start till tomorrow and he had only four cigarettes left For the 
moment he had shut his ears to the remoter noises and was listening to the stuff 
that streamed out of the telescreen It appeared that there had even been 
demonstrations to thank Big Brother for raising the chocolate ration to twenty 
grammes a week And only yesterday, he reflected, it had been announced that 
the ration was to be reduced to twenty grammes a week Was it possible that 
they could swallow that, after only twenty-four hours? Yes, they swallowed it 
Parsons swallowed it easily, with the stupidity of an animal The eyeless 
creature at the other table swallowed it fanatically, passionately, with a furious 
desire to track down, denounce, and vaporize anyone who should suggest that 
last week the ration had been thirty grammes Syme, too-in some more 
complex way, involving doublethink, Syme swallowed it Was he, then, alone 
in the possession of a memory? 

The fabulous statistics continued to pour out of the telescreen As compared 
with last year there was more food, more clothes, more houses, more furniture, 
more cooking-pots, more fuel, more ships, more helicopters, more books, 
more babies-more of everything except disease, crime, and insanity Year by 
year and minute by mmute, everybody and everything was whizzing rapidly 
upwards As Syme had done earlier Winston had taken up his spoon and was 
dabbling m the pale-coloured gravy that dribbled across the table, drawing a 
long streak of it out into a pattern He meditated resentfully on the physical 
texture of life Had it always been like this? Had food always tasted like this? 
He looked round the canteen, A low-ceilmged, crowded room, its walls grimy 
from the contact of innumerable bodies, battered metal tables and chairs, 
placed so close together that you sat with elbows touching, bent spoons, 
dented trays, coarse white mugs, all surfaces greasy, grime in every crack, and 
a sourish, composite smell of bad gm and bad coffee and metallic stew and 
dirty clothes Always m your stomach and in your skm there was a sort of 
protest, a feebng that you had been cheated of something that you had a right 



775 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

to It was true that he had no memories of anything greatly different In any 
time that he could accurately remember, there had never been quite enough to 
eat, one had never had socks or underclothes that were not full of holes, 
furniture had always been battered and rickety, rooms underheated, tube 
trains crowded, houses falling to pieces, bread dark-coloured, tea a rarity, 
coffee filthy-tastmg, cigarettes insufficient-nothing cheap and plentiful except 
synthetic gm And though, of course, it grew worse as one’s body aged, was it 
not a sign that this was not the natural order of things, if one’s heart sickened at 
the discomfort and dirt and scarcity, the interminable winters, the stickiness of 
one’s socks, the lifts that never worked, the cold water, the gritty soap, the 
cigarettes that came to pieces, the food with its strange evil taste? Why should 
one feel it to be intolerable unless one had some kind of ancestral memory that 
things had once been different? 

He looked round the canteen again Nearly everyone was ugly, and would 
still have been ugly even if dressed otherwise than in the uniform blue overalls 
On the far side of the room, sitting at a table alone, a small, curiously beetle- 
like man was drinking a cup of coffee, his little eyes darting suspicious glances 
from side to side How easy it was, thought Winston, if you did not look about 
you, to believe that the physical type set up by the Party as an ideal-tall 
muscular youths and deep-bosomed maidens, blond-haired, vital, sunburnt, 
carefree-existed and even predominated Actually, so far as he could judge, 
the majority of people in Airstrip One were small, dark, and ill-favoured It 
was curious how that beetle-like type proliferated in the Ministries little 
dumpy men, growing stout very early in life, with short legs, swift scuttling 
movements, and fat mscrutable faces with very small eyes It was the type that 
seemed to flourish best under the dominion of the Party 
The announcement from the Ministry of Plenty ended on another trumpet 
call and gave way to tinny music Parsons, stirred to vague enthusiasm by the 
bombardment of figures, took his pipe out of his mouth 

'The Ministry of Plenty’s certainly done a good job this year,’ he said with a 
knowing shake of his head 'By the way, Smith old boy, I suppose you haven’t 
got any razor blades you can let me have?’ 

‘Not one,’ said Winston ‘I’ve been using the same blade for six weeks 
myself ’ 

‘Ah, well-just thought I’d ask you, old boy ’ 

‘Sorry,’ said Winston 

The quacking voice from the next table, temporarily silenced during the 
Ministry’s announcement, had started up again, as loud as ever For some 
reason Winston suddenly found himself thinking of Mrs Parsons, with her 
wispy hair and the dust m the creases of her face. Within two years those 
children would be denouncing her to the Thought Police Mrs Parsons would 
be vaporized. Syme would be vaporized Winston would be vaporized 
O’Brien would be vaporized Parsons, on the other hand, would never be 
vaporized. The eyeless creature with the quacking voice would never be 
vaporized. The little beetle-like men who scuttled so nimbly through the 
labyrinthine corridors of Mmistnes-they, too, would never be vaporized And 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 779 

the girl with dark hair, the girl from the Fiction Department- she would never 
be vaporized either It seemed to him that he knew instinctively who would 
survive and who would perish though just what it was that made for survival, 
it was not easy to say 

At this moment he was dragged out of his reverie with a violent j erk The girl 
at the next table had turned partly round and was looking at him It was the girl 
with dark hair She was looking at him m a sidelong way, but with curious 
intensity The instant that she caught his eye she looked away again 

The sweat started out on Winston’s backbone A horrible pang of terror 
went through him It was gone almost at once, but it left a sort of nagging 
uneasiness behind Why was she watching him? Why did she keep following 
him about? Unfortunately he could not remember whether she had already 
been at that table when he arrived, or had come there afterwards But 
yesterday, at any rate, during the Two Minutes Hate, she had sat immediately 
behind him when there was no apparent need to do so Quite likely her real 
object had been to listen to him and make sure whether he was shouting loudly 
enough 

His earlier thought returned to him* probably she was not actually a member 
of the Thought Police, but then it was precisely the amateur spy who was the 
greatest danger of all He did not know how long she had been looking at him, 
but perhaps for as much as five minutes, and it was possible that his features 
had not been perfectly under control It was terribly dangerous to let your 
thoughts wander when you were in any public place or within range of a 
telescreen The smallest thing could give you away A nervous tic, an 
unconscious look of anxiety, a habit of muttering to yourself-anythmg that 
carried with it the suggestion of abnormality, of having something to hide In 
any case, to wear an improper expression on your face (to look incredulous 
when a victory was announced, for example) was itself a punishable offence 
There was even a word for it in Newspeak. facecrime, it was called 

The girl had turned her back on him again Perhaps after all she was not 
really following him about, perhaps it was coincidence that she had sat so close 
to him two days runnmg His cigarette had gone out, and he laid it carefully on 
the edge of the table He would finish smokmg it after work, if he could keep 
the tobacco in it Quite likely the person at the next table was a spy of the 
Thought Police, and quite likely he would be in the cellars of the Mimstry of 
Love within three days, but a cigarette end must not be wasted Syme had 
folded up his strip of paper and stowed it away m his pocket Parsons had 
begun talking again 

‘Did I ever tell you, old boy,’ he said, chuckling round the stem of his pipe, 
‘about the time when those two nippers of mine set fire to the old market- 
woman’s skirt because they saw her wrapping up sausages in a poster of B.B ? 
Sneaked up behind her and set fire to it with a box of matches Burned her 
quite badly, I believe Little beggars, eh? But keen as mustard 1 That’s a first- 
rate traimng they give them m the Spies nowadays-better than m my day, 
even What d’you think’s the latest thing they’ve served them out with? Ear 
trumpets for listening through keyholes 1 My little girl brought one home the 



j8o Nineteen Eighty-Four 

other night-tried it out on our sitting-room door, and reckoned she could hear 
twice as much as with her ear to the hole Of course it’s only a toy, mind you 
Still, gives ’em the right idea, eh*’ 

At this moment the telescreen let out a piercing whistle It was the signal to 
return to work All three men sprang to their feet to )om in the struggle round 
the lifts, and the remaining tobacco fell out of Winston’s cigarette 


6 


Winston was writing m his diary 

It was three years ago It was on a dark evening, m a narrow side-street near one of the big 
railway stations She was standing near a doorway in the wall, under a street lamp that hardly gave 
any light She had a young face, painted very thick It was really the paint that appealed to me, the 
whiteness of it, like a mask, and the bright red lips Party women never paint their faces There was 
nobody else in the street, and no telescreens She said two dollars I- 

For the moment it was too difficult to go on He shut his eyes and pressed his 
fingers against them, trying to squeeze out the vision that kept recurring He 
had an almost overwhelming temptation to shout a string of filthy words at the 
top of his voice Or to bang his head against the wall, to kick over the table, and 
hurl the inkpot through the window- to do any violent or noisy or painful thing 
that might black out the memory that was tormenting him 

Your worst enemy, he reflected, was your own nervous system At any 
moment the tension inside you was liable to translate itself into some visible 
symptom He thought of a man whom he had passed in the street a few weeks 
back a quite ordinary-looking man, a Party member, aged thirty-five to forty, 
tallish and thin, carrying a brief-case They were a few metres apart when the 
left side of the man’s face was suddenly contorted by a sort of spasm It 
happened again just as they were passing one another it was only a twitch, a 
quiver, rapid as the clicking of a camera shutter, but obviously habitual He 
remembered thinking at the time. That poor devil is done for And what was 
fnghtemng was that the action was quite possibly unconscious The most 
deadly danger of all was talking m your sleep. There was no way of guarding 
against that, so far as he could see 

He drew his breath and went on writing, 

I went with her through the doorway and across a backyard into a basement kitchen There was 
a bed against the wall, and a lamp on the table, turned down very low She- 

Hts teeth were set on edge He would have liked to spit Simultaneously with 
the woman in the basement kitchen he thought of Katharine, his wife Winston 
was marned-had been married, at any rate probably he still was married, so 
far as he knew his wife was not dead He seemed to breathe again the warm 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 781 

stuffy odour of the basement kitchen, an odour compounded of bugs and dirty 
clothes and villainous cheap scent, but nevertheless alluring, because no 
woman of the Party ever used scent, or could be imagined as doing so Only the 
proles used scent In his mind the smell of it was inextricably mixed up with 
fornication 

When he had gone with that woman it had been his first lapse in two years or 
thereabouts Consorting with prostitutes was forbidden, of course, but it was 
one of those rules that you could occasionally nerve yourself to break It was 
dangerous, but it was not a life-and-death matter To be caught with a 
prostitute might mean five years m a forced-labour camp not more, if you had 
committed no other offence And it was easy enough, provided that you could 
avoid being caught in the act The poorer quarters swarmed with women who 
were ready to sell themselves Some could even be purchased for a bottle of 
gm, which the proles were not supposed to drink Tacitly the Party was even 
inclined to encourage prostitution, as an outlet for instincts which could not be 
altogether suppressed Mere debauchery did not matter very much, so long as 
it was furtive and joyless and only involved the women of a submerged and 
despised class The unforgivable crime was promiscuity between Party 
members But-though this was one of the crimes that the accused in the great 
purges invariably confessed to-it was difficult to imagine any such thing 
actually happening 

The aim of the Party was not merely to prevent men and women from 
forming loyalties which it might not be able to control Its real, undeclared 
purpose w T as to remove all pleasure from the sexual act Not love so much as 
eroticism was the enemy, inside marriage as well as outside it All marriages 
between Party members had to be approved by a committee appointed for the 
purpose, and-though the principle was never clearly stated-permission was 
always refused if the couple concerned gave the impression of being physically 
attracted to one another The only recognized purpose of marriage was to 
beget children for the service of the Party Sexual intercourse was to be looked 
on as a slightly disgusting minor operation, like having an enema This agam 
was never put into plain words, but m an indirect way it was rubbed into every 
Party member from childhood onwards There were even organizations such 
as the Junior Anti-Sex League, which advocated complete celibacy for both 
sexes. All children were to be begotten by artificial insemination ( artsem , it was 
called in Newspeak) and brought up in public institutions This, Winston was 
aware, was not meant altogether seriously, but somehow it fitted in with the 
general ideology of the Party The Party was trying to kill the sex instinct, or, if 
it could not be killed, then to distort it and dirty it He did not know why this 
was so, but it seemed natural that it should be so And as far as the women were 
concerned, the Party’s efforts were largely successful 

He thought agam of Katharine It must be nine, ten-nearly eleven years 
since they had parted It was curious how seldom he thought of her. For days 
at a time he was capable of forgetting that he had ever been married They had 
only been together for about fifteen months The Party did not permit divorce, 
but it rather encouraged separation in cases where there were no children 



j 82 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

Katharine was a tall, fair-haired girl, very straight, with splendid 
movements She had a bold, aquiline face, a face that one might have called 
noble until one discovered that there was as nearly as possible nothing behind 
it Very early m her married life he had decided-though perhaps it was only 
that he knew her more intimately than he knew most people-that she had 
without exception the most stupid, vulgar, empty mind that he had ever 
encountered She had not a thought m her head that was not a slogan, and 
there was no imbecility, absolutely none that she was not capable of 
swallowing if the Party handed it out to her ‘The human sound-track’ he 
nicknamed her m his own mind Yet he could have endured living with her if it 
had not been for just one thing- sex 

As soon as he touched her she seemed to wince and stiffen To embrace her 
was like embracing a jointed wooden image And what was strange was that 
even when she was clasping him against her he had the feeling that she was 
simultaneously pushing him away with all her strength The rigidity of her 
muscles managed to convey that impression She would he there with shut 
eyes, neither resisting nor co-operating but submitting It was extraordinarily 
embarrassing, and, after a while, horrible But even then he could have borne 
living with her if it had been agreed that they should remain celibate But 
curiously enough it was Katharine who refused this They must, she said, 
produce a child if they could So the performance continued to happen, once a 
week quite regularly, whenever it was not impossible She even used to remind 
him of it m the morning, as something which had to be done that evening and 
which must not be forgotten She had two names for it One was ‘making a 
baby’, and the other was ‘our duty to the Party’ (yes, she had actually used that 
phrase) Quite soon he grew to have a feeling of positive dread when the 
appointed day came round But luckily no child appeared, and in the end she 
agreed to give up trying, and soon afterwards they parted 

Wmston sighed maudibly He picked up his pen again and wrote 

She threw herself down on the bed, and at once, without any kind of preliminary, in the most 
coarse, horrible way you can imagine, pulled up her skirt I- 

He saw himself standing there in the dim lamplight, with the smell of bugs 
and cheap scent m his nostrils, and m his heart a feeling of defeat and 
resentment which even at that moment was mixed up with the thought of 
Katharine’s white body, frozen for ever by the hypnotic power of the Party 
Why did it always have to be like this? Why could he not have a woman of his 
own instead of these filthy scuffles at intervals of years? But a real love affair 
was an almost unthinkable event The women of the Party were all alike 
Chastity was as deep ingrained in them as Party loyalty By careful early 
conditioning, by games and cold water, by the rubbish that was dinned into 
them at school and in the Spies and the Youth League, by lectures, parades, 
songs, slogans, and martial music, the natural feeling had been driven out of 
diem. His reason told him that there must be exceptions, but his heart did not 
believe it. They were all impregnable, as the Party intended that they should 
be, Amfwbat he wanted, more even than to be loved, was to break down that 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 783 

wall of virtue, even if it were only once m his whole life The sexual act, 
successfully performed, was rebellion Desire was thoughtcrime Even to have 
awakened Katharine, if he could have achieved it, would have been like a 
seduction, although she was his wife 

But the rest of the story had got to be written down He wrote 

I turned up the lamp When I saw her in the light- 

After the darkness the feeble light of the paraffin lamp had seemed very 
bright For the first time he could see the woman properly He had taken a step 
towards her and then halted, full of lust and terror He was painfully conscious 
of the risk he had taken m coming here It was perfectly possible that the 
patrols would catch him on the way out for that matter they might be waiting 
outside the door at this moment If he went away without even doing what he 
had come here to do- 1 

It had got to be written down, it had got to be confessed What he had 
suddenly seen in the lamplight was that the woman was old The paint was 
plastered so thick on her face that it looked as though it might crack like a 
cardboard mask There were streaks of white in her hair, but the truly dreadful 
detail was that her mouth had fallen a little open, revealing nothing except a 
cavernous blackness She had no teeth at all 

He wrote hurriedly, m scrabbling handwriting 

When I saw her in the light she was quite an old woman, fifty years old at least But I went ahead 
and did it just the same 

He pressed his fingers against his eyelids again He had written it down at 
last, but it made no difference The therapy had not worked The urge to shout 
filthy words at the top of his voice was as strong as ever 


7 


If there is hope, wrote Winston , it lies in the proles 

If there was hope, it must lie m the proles, because only there, in those 
swarming disregarded masses, 85 per cent of the population of Oceania, could 
the force to destroy the Party ever be generated The Party could not be 
overthrown from within Its enemies, if it had any enemies, had no way of 
coming together or even of identifying one another Even if the legendary 
Brotherhood existed, as just possibly it might, it was inconceivable that its 
members could ever assemble m larger numbers than twos and threes 
Rebellion meant a look m the eyes, an inflexion of the voice, at the most, an 
occasional whispered word But the proles, if only they could somehow 



J84 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

become conscious of their own strength, would have no need to conspire They 
needed only to rise up and shake themselves like a horse shaking off flies If 
they chose they could blow the Party to pieces tomorrow mormng Surely 
sooner or later it must occur to them to do it'* And yet - 1 

He remembered how once he had been walking down a crowded street when 
a tremendous shout of hundreds of voices-women’s voices-had burst from a 
side-street a little way ahead It was a great formidable cry of anger and 
despair, a deep, loud ‘Oh-o-o-o-oh f ’ that went humming on like the 
reverberation of a bell His heart had leapt It’s started 1 he had thought A not 1 
The proles are breaking loose at last 1 When he had reached the spot it was to 
see a mob of two or three hundred women crowding round the stalls of a street 
market, with faces as tragic as though they had been the doomed passengers on 
a s in king ship But at this moment the general despair broke down into a 
multitude of individual quarrels It appeared that one of the stalls had been 
selling tin saucepans They were wretched, flimsy things, but cooking-pots of 
any kind were always difficult to get Now the supply had unexpectedly given 
out The successful women, bumped and jostled by the rest, were trying to 
make off with their saucepans while dozens of others clamoured round the 
stall, accusing the stall-keeper of favouritism and of having more saucepans 
somewhere m reserve There was a fresh outburst of yells Two bloated 
women, one of them with her hair coming down, had got hold of the same 
saucepan and were trying to tear it out of one another’s hands For a moment 
they were both tugging, and then the handle came off Winston watched them 
disgustedly And yet, just for a moment, what almost frightening power had 
sounded m that cry from only a few hundred throats' Why was it that they 
could never shout like that about anything that mattered^ 

He wrote 

Until they become conscious they will never rebel, and until after they have rebelled they cannot 
become conscious 

That, he reflected, might almost have been a transcription from one of the 
Party textbooks The Party claimed, of course, to have liberated the proles 
from bondage Before the Revolution they had been hideously oppressed by 
the capitalists, they had been starved and flogged, women had been forced to 
work m the coal mines (women still did work in the coal mmes, as a matter of 
fact), children had been sold into the factories at the age of six But 
simultaneously, true to the principles of doublethink, the Party taught that the 
proles were natural inferiors who must be kept m subjection, like animals, by 
the application of a few simple rules. In reality very little was known about the 
proles. It was not necessary to know much So long as they continued to work 
and breed, their other activities were without importance. Left to themselves, 
like cattle turned loose upon the plains of Argentina* they had reverted to a 
style of life that appeared to be natural to them, a sort of ancestral pattern. 
They; were born, they grew up m the gutters, they went to work at twelve, they 
passed through a brief blossoming-period of beauty and sexual desire, they 
married at twenty, they were middle-aged at thirty, they died* for the most 



Nineteen Eighty-Four y8s 

part, at sixty Heavy physical work, the care of home and children, petty 
quarrels with neighbours, films, football, beer, and, above all, gambling, filled 
up the horizon of minds To keep them in control was not difficult A few 
agents of the Thought Police moved always among them, spreading false 
rumours and marking down and eliminating the few individuals who were 
judged capable of becoming dangerous, but no attempt was made to 
indoctrinate them with the ideology of the Party It was not desirable that the 
proles should have strong political feelings All that was required of them was a 
primitive patriotism which could be appealed to whenever it was necessary to 
make them accept longer working-hours or shorter rations And even when 
they became discontented, as they sometimes did, their discontent led 
nowhere, because being without general ideas, they could only focus it on 
petty specific grievances The larger evils invariably escaped their notice The 
great majority of proles did not even have telescreens in their homes Even the 
civil police interfered with them very little There was a vast amount of 
criminality m London, a whole world-withm-a-world of thieves, bandits, 
prostitutes, drug-peddlers, and racketeers of every description, but since it all 
happened among the proles themselves, it was of no importance In all 
questions of morals they were allowed to follow their ancestral code The 
sexual puntanism of the Party was not imposed upon them Promiscuity went 
unpunished, divorce was permitted For that matter, even religious worship 
would have been permitted if the proles had shown any sign of needing or 
wanting it They were beneath suspicion As the Party slogan put it ‘Proles 
and animals are free ’ 

Winston reached down and cautiously scratched his varicose ulcer It had 
begun itching again The thing you invariably came back to was the 
impossibility of knowing what life before the Revolution had really been like 
He took out of the drawer a copy of a children’s history textbook which he had 
borrowed from Mrs Parsons, and began copying a passage into the diary 

In the old days (it ran), before the glorious Revolution, London was not the beautiful city that 
we know today It was a dark, dirty, miserable place where hardly anybody had enough to eat and 
where hundreds and thousands of poor people had no boots on their feet and not even a roof to 
sleep under Children no older than you are had to work twelve hours a day for cruel masters, who 
flogged them with whips if they worked too slowly and fed them on nothing but stale breadcrusts 
and water But in among all this terrible poverty there were just a few great big beautiful houses 
that were lived in by rich men who had as many as thirty servants to look after them These rich 
men were called capitalists They were fat, ugly men with wicked faces, like the one in the picture 
on the opposite page You see that he is dressed m a long black coat which was called a frock coat, 
and a queer, shiny hat shaped like a stovepipe, which was called a top hat This was the uniform of 
the capitalists, and no one else was allowed to wear it The capitalists owned everything in the 
world, and everyone else was their slave They owned all the land, all the houses, all the factories, 
and all the money If anyone disobeyed them they could throw them into prison, or they could take 
his job away and starve him to death When any ordinary person spoke to a capitalist he had to 
cringe and bow to him, and take off his cap and address him as ‘Sir’ The chief of all the capitalists 
was called the King, and- 

But he knew the rest of the catalogue There would be mention of the 
bishops in their lawn sleeves, the judges in their ermine robes, the pillory, the 
stocks, the treadmill, the cat-o’-mne tails, the Lord Mayor’s Banquet, and the 



j 86 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

practice of kissing the Pope’s toe There was also something called the jus 
pnmae noctis , which would probably not be mentioned in a textbook for 
children It was the law by which every capitalist had the right to sleep with 
any woman working m one of his factories 

How could you tell how much of it was lies> It might be true that the average 
human being was better off now than he had been before the Revolution The 
only evidence to the contrary was the mute protest in your own bones, the 
instinctive feeling that the conditions you lived in were intolerable and that at 
some other time they must have been different It struck him that the truly 
characteristic thing about modern life was not its cruelty and insecurity, but 
simply its bareness, its dinginess, its listlessness Life, if you looked about you, 
bore no resemblance not only to the lies that streamed out of the telescreens, 
but even to the ideals that the Party was trying to achieve Great areas of it, 
even for a Party member, were neutral and non-political, a matter of slogging 
through dreary jobs, fighting for a place on the Tube, darning a worn-out sock, 
cadging a saccharine tablet, saving a cigarette end The ideal set up by the 
Party was something huge, terrible, and glittermg-a world of steel and 
concrete, of monstrous machines and terrifying weapons-a nation of warriors 
and fanatics, marching forward m perfect unity, all thinking the same thoughts 
and shouting the same slogans, perpetually working, fighting, triumphing, 
persecutmg-three hundred million people all with the same face The reality 
was decaying, dingy cities where under-fed people shuffled to and fro in leaky 
shoes, m patched-up nineteenth-century houses that smelt always of cabbage 
and bad lavatories He seemed to see a vision of London, vast and ruinous, city 
of a million dustbins, and mixed up with it was a picture of Mrs Parsons, a 
woman with lined face and wispy hair, fiddling helplessly with a blocked 
waste-pipe 

He reached down and scratched his ankle again Day and night the 
telescreens bruised your ears with statistics proving that people today had 
more food, more clothes, better houses, better recreations-that they lived 
longer, worked shorter hours, were bigger, healthier, stronger, happier, more 
intelligent, better educated, than the people of fifty years ago Not a word of it 
could ever be proved or disproved The Party claimed, for example, that to- 
day 40 per cent of adult proles were literate before the Revolution, it was said, 
the number had only been 15 per cent The Party claimed that the infant 
mortality rate was now only 160 per thousand, whereas before the Revolution 
it had been 300-and so it went on It was like a single equation with two 
unknowns It might very well be that literally every word in the history books, 
even the things that one accepted without question, was pure fantasy For all 
he knew there might never have been any such law as the jus pnmae noctis , or 
any such creature as a capitalist, or any such garment as a top hat 

Everything faded into mist The past was erased, the erasure was forgotten, 
the he became truth Just once in his life he had possessed-after the event that 
was What counted— concrete, unmistakable evidence of an act of falsification 
He had held it between his fingers for as long as thirty seconds In 1 973, rt must 
haw* heen—at any rate, if was at about the time when he and Katharine had 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 

parted But the really relevant date was seven or eight years earlier 

The story really began m the middle ’sixties, the period of the great purges 
in which the original leaders of the Revolution were wiped out once and for all 
By 1970 none of them was left, except Big Brother himself All the rest had by 
that time been exposed as traitors and counter-revolutionaries Goldstein had 
fled and was hiding no one knew where, and of the others, a few had simply 
disappeared, while the majority had been executed after spectacular public 
trials at which they made confession of their crimes Among the last survivors 
were three men named Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford It must have been m 
1965 that these three had been arrested As often happened, they had vanished 
for a year or more, so that one did not know whether they were alive or dead, 
and then had suddenly been brought forth to incriminate themselves in the 
usual way They had confessed to intelligence with the enemy (at that date, 
too, the enemy was Eurasia), embezzlement of public funds, the murder of 
various trusted Party members, intrigues against the leadership of Big Brother 
which had started long before the Revolution happened, and acts of sabotage 
causing the death of hundreds of thousands of people After confessing to these 
things they had been pardoned, reinstated in the Party, and given posts which 
were m fact sinecures but which sounded important All three had written 
long, abject articles m The Times, analysmg the reasons for their defection and 
promising to make amends 

Some time after their release Winston had actually seen all three of them m 
the Chestnut Tree Cafe He remembered the sort of terrified fascination with 
which he had watched them out of the corner of his eye They were men far 
older than himself, relics of the ancient world, almost the last great figures left 
over from the heroic early days of the Party The glamour of the underground 
struggle and the civil war still faintly clung to them He had the feeling, though 
already at that time facts and dates were growing blurry, that he had known 
their names years earlier than he had known that of Big Brother But also they 
were outlaws, enemies, untouchables, doomed with absolute certainty to 
extinction within a year or two No one who had once fallen into the hands of 
the Thought Police ever escaped in the end They were corpses waiting to be 
sent back to the grave 

There was no one at any of the tables nearest to them. It was not wise even to 
be seen in the neighbourhood of such people They were sitting in silence 
before glasses of the gm flavoured with cloves which was the speciality of the 
cafe Of the three, it was Rutherford whose appearance had most impressed 
Winston Rutherford had once been a famous caricaturist, whose brutal 
cartoons had helped to inflame popular opimon before and during the 
Revolution Even now, at long intervals, his cartoons were appearing in The 
Times They were simply an imitation of his earlier manner, and curiously 
lifeless and unconvincing. Always they were a rehashing of the ancient 
themes'-slum tenements, starving children, street battles, capitalists in top 
hats-even on the barricades the capitalists still seemed to cling to their top 
hats-an endless, hopeless effort to get back into the past He was a monstrous 
man, with a mane of greasy grey hair, his face pouched and seamed, with thick 



j88 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

negroid lips At one time he must have been immensely strong, now his great 
body was sagging, sloping, bulging, falling away in every direction He seemed 
to be breaking up before one’s eyes, like a mountain crumbling 

It was the lonely hour of fifteen Winston could not now remember how he 
had come to be in the cafe at such a time The place was almost empty A tinny 
music was trickling from the telescreens The three men sat in their corner 
almost motionless, never speaking Uncommanded, the waiter brought fresh 
glasses of gm There was a chessboard on the table beside them, with the pieces 
set out but no game started And then, for perhaps half a minute in all, 
something happened to the telescreens The tune that they were playing 
changed, and the tone of the music changed too There came into lt-but it was 
something hard to describe It was a peculiar, cracked, braying, jeering note in 
his mind Wmston called it a yellow note And then a voice from the telescreen 
was singing 


Under the spreading chestnut tree 
I sold you and you sold me 
There he they, and here lie we 
Under the spreading chestnut tree 

The three men never stirred But when Wmston glanced again at 
Rutherford’s ruinous face, he saw that his eyes were full of tears And for the 
first time he noticed, with a kind of inward shudder, and yet not knowing at 
what he shuddered, that both Aaronson and Rutherford had broken noses 

A little later all three were re-arrested It appeared that they had engaged m 
fresh conspiracies from the very moment of their release At their second trial 
they confessed to all their old crimes over again, with a whole string of new 
ones They were executed, and their fate was recorded m the Party histories, a 
warning to posterity About five years after this, in 1973, Winston was 
unrolling a wad of documents which had just flopped out of the pneumatic 
tube on to his desk when he came on a fragment of paper which had evidently 
been slipped in among the others and then forgotten The instant he had 
flattened it out he saw its significance It was a half-page torn out of The Times 
of about ten years earlier-the top half of the page, so that it included the 
date-and it contained a photograph of the delegates at some Party function in 
New York. Prominent m the middle of the group were Jones, Aaronson, and 
Rutherford. There was no mistaking them, m any case their names were m the 
caption at the bottom. 

The point was that at both trials all three men had confessed that on that 
date they had been on Eurasian soil They had flown from a secret airfield m 
Canada to a rendezvous somewhere in Siberia, and had conferred with 
members of the Eurasian General Staff, to whom they had betrayed important 
military secrets. The date had stuck in Winston’s memory because it chanced 
to be midsummer day; but the whole story must be on record in countless 
other places as well There was only one possible conclusion the confessions 
were lies. 

Of course, this was not m itself a discovery Even at that time Winston had 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 789 

not imagined that the people who were wiped out m the purges had actually 
committed the crimes that they were accused of But this was concrete 
evidence, it was a fragment of the abolished past, like a fossil bone which turns 
up in the wrong stratum and destroys a geological theory It was enough to 
blow the Party to atoms, if m some way it could have been published to the 
world and its significance made known 

He had gone straight on working As soon as he saw what the photograph 
was, and what it meant, he had covered it up with another sheet of paper, 
Luckily, when he unrolled it, it had been upside-down from the point of view 
of the telescreen 

He took his scribbling pad on his knee and pushed back his chair, so as to get 
as far away from the telescreen as possible To keep your face expressionless 
was not difficult, and even your breathing could be controlled, with an effort 
but you could not control the beating of your heart, and the telescreen was 
quite delicate enough to pick it up He let what he judged to be ten minutes go 
by, tormented all the while by the fear that some accident-a sudden draught 
blowing across his desk, for mstance-would betray him Then, without 
uncovering it again, he dropped the photograph into the memory hole, along 
with some other waste papers Within another minute, perhaps, it would have 
crumbled into ashes 

That was ten- eleven years ago Today, probably, he would have kept that 
photograph It was curious that the fact of having held it in his fingers seemed 
to him to make a difference even now, when the photograph itself, as well as the 
event it recorded, was only memory Was the Party’s hold upon the past less 
strong, he wondered, because a piece of evidence which existed no longer had 
once existed? 

But today, supposing that it could be somehow resurrected from its ashes, 
the photograph might not even be evidence Already, at the time when he 
made his discovery, Oceania was no longer at war with Eurasia, and it must 
have been to the agents of Eastasia that the three dead men had betrayed their 
country Since then there had been other charges-two, three, he could not 
remember how many Very likely the confessions had been rewritten and 
rewritten until the original facts and dates no longer had the smallest 
significance The past not only changed, but changed continuously What 
most afflicted him with the sense of nightmare was that he had never clearly 
understood why the huge imposture was undertaken The immediate 
advantages of falsifying the past were obvious, but the ultimate motive was 
mysterious He took up his pen again and wrote 

I understand HOW I do not understand WHY 

He wondered, as he had many times wondered before, whether he himself 
was a lunatic Perhaps a lunatic was simply a minority of one At one time it 
had been a sign of madness to believe that the earth goes round the sun. today, 
to believe that the past is unalterable. He might be alone in holding that belief, 
and if alone, then a lunatic But the thought of being a lunatic did not greatly 
trouble him the horror was that he might also be wrong 



7po Nineteen Eighty-Four 

He picked up the children’s history book and looked at the portrait of Big 
Brother which formed its frontispiece The hypnotic eyes gazed into his own 
It was as though some huge force were pressing down upon you-something 
that penetrated inside your skull, battering against your brain, frightening you 
out of your beliefs, persuading you, almost, to deny the evidence of your 
senses In the end the Party would announce that two and two made five, and 
you would have to believe it It was inevitable that they should make that claim 
sooner or later the logic of their position demanded it Not merely the validity 
of experience, but the very existence of external reality, was tacitly denied by 
their philosophy The heresy of heresies was common sense And what was 
terrifying was not that they would kill you for thinking otherwise, but that they 
might be right For, after all, how do we know that two and two make four? Or 
that the force of gravity works? Or that the past is unchangeable? If both the 
past and the external world exist only m the mind, and if the mind itself is 
controllable- what then? 

But no 1 His courage seemed suddenly to stiffen of its own accord The face 
of O’Brien, not called up by any obvious association, had floated into his mind 
He knew, with more certainty than before, that O’Brien was on his side He 
was writing the diary for O’Brien-to O’Brien it was like an interminable letter 
which no one would ever read, but which was addressed to a particular person 
and took its colour from that fact 

The Party told you to reject the evidence of your eyes and ears It was their 
final, most essential command His heart sank as he thought of the enormous 
power arrayed against him, the ease with which any Party intellectual would 
overthrow him m debate, the subtle arguments which he would not be able to 
understand, much less answer And yet he was in the right 1 They were wrong 
and he was right The obvious, the silly, and the true had got to be defended 
Truisms are true, hold on to that' The solid world exists, its laws do not 
change Stones are hard, water is wet, objects unsupported fall towards the 
earth’s centre With the feeling that he was speaking to O’Brien, and also that 
he was setting forth an important axiom, he wrote 

Freedom is the freedom to say that two plus two make four If that is granted, all else follows 


8 


From somewhere at the bottom of a passage the smell of roasting coffee-real 
coffee, not Victory Coffee-came floating out into the street Wmston paused 
involuntarily For perhaps two seconds he was back m the half-forgotten 
WOjrld of he childhood. Then a door banged, seeming to cut off the smell as 
abruptly as though it had been a sound 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 791 

He had walked several kilometres over pavements* and his varicose ulcer 
was throbbing This was the second time in three weeks that he had missed an 
evening at the Community Centre a rash act* since you could be certain that 
the number of your attendances at the Centre was carefully checked In 
principle a Party member had no spare time, and was never alone except in 
bed It was assumed that when he was not working, eating, or sleeping he 
would be takmg part m some kind of communal recreation to do anything that 
suggested a taste for solitude, even to go for a walk by yourself, was always 
slightly dangerous There was a word for it in Newspeak ownlife , it was called, 
meamng individualism and eccentricity But this evening as he came out of the 
Ministry the balmmess of the April air had tempted him The sky was a 
warmer blue than he had seen it that year, and suddenly the long, noisy 
evening at the Centre, the boring, exhausting games, the lectures, the creaking 
camaraderie oiled by gm, had seemed intolerable On impulse he had turned 
away from the bus-stop and wandered off into the labyrinth of London, first 
south, then east, then north again, losing himself among unknown streets and 
hardly bothering in which direction he was going 

‘If there is hope,’ he had written m the diary, ‘it lies m the proles 5 The 
words kept coming back to him, statement of a mystical truth and a palpable 
absurdity He was somewhere in the vague, brown-coloured slums to the north 
and east of what had once been Saint Pancras Station. He was walking up a 
cobbled street of little two-storey houses with battered doorways which gave 
straight on the pavement and which were somehow curiously suggestive of 
ratholes There were puddles of filthy water here and there among the cobbles 
In and out of the dark doorways, and down narrow alley-ways that branched 
off on either side, people swarmed m astonishing numbers-girls in full bloom, 
with crudely lipsticked mouths, and youths who chased the girls, and swollen 
waddling women who showed you what the girls would be like m ten years’ 
time, and old bent creatures shuffling along on splayed feet, and ragged 
barefooted children who played m the puddles and then scattered at angry 
yells from their mothers Perhaps a quarter of the windows in the street were 
broken and boarded up Most of the people paid no attention to Winston; a few 
eyed him with a sort of guarded curiosity Two monstrous women with brick- 
red forearms folded across their aprons were talking outside a doorway 
Winston caught scraps of conversation as he approached 

‘ “Yes,” I says to ’er, “that’s all very well,” I says “But if you’d of been in 
my place you’d of done the same as what I done It’s easy to criticize,” I says, 
“but you ain’t got the same problems as what I got ”’ ‘Ah,’ said the other, 
‘that’s jest it That’s jest where it is ’ 

The strident voices stopped abruptly The women studied him in hostile 
silence as he went past But it was not hostility, exactly, merely a kind of 
wariness, a momentary stiffening, as at the passing of some unfamiliar animal 
The blue overalls of the Party could not be a common sight m a street like this 
Indeed, it was unwise to be seen in such places, unless you had definite 
business there The patrols might stop you if you happened to run into them 
‘May I see your papers, comrade? What are you doing here? What time did you 



792 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

leave work? Is this your usual way home?’-and so on and so forth Not that 
there was any rule against walking home by an unusual route but it was 
enough to draw attention to you if the Thought Police heard about it 

Suddenly the whole street was m commotion There were yells of warning 
from all sides People were shooting into the doorways like rabbits A young 
woman leapt out of a doorway a little ahead of Winston, grabbed up a tiny child 
playing in a puddle, whipped her apron round it, and leapt back again, all in 
one movement At the same instant a man m a concertina-like black suit, who 
had emerged from a side alley, ran towards Winston, pointing excitedly to the 
sky 

‘Steamer 1 ’ he yelled ‘Look out, guv’nor 1 Bang over’ead 1 Lay down quick 1 ’ 
‘Steamer’ was a nickname which, for some reason, the proles applied to 
rocket bombs Winston promptly flung himself on his face The proles were 
nearly always right when they gave you a warning of this kind They seemed to 
possess some kind of instinct which told them several seconds in advance when 
a rocket was coming, although the rockets supposedly travelled faster than 
sound Winston clasped his forearms above his head There was a roar that 
seemed to make the pavement heave, a shower of light objects pattered on to 
his back When he stood up he found that he was covered with fragments of 
glass from the nearest window 

He walked on The bomb had demolished a group of houses 200 metres up 
the street A black plume of smoke hung in the sky, and below it a cloud of 
plaster dust m which a crowd was already forming round the rums There was 
a little pile of plaster lying on the pavement ahead of him, and in the middle of 
it he could see a bright red streak When he got up to it he saw that it was a 
human hand severed at the wrist Apart from the bloody stump, the hand was 
so completely whitened as to resemble a plaster cast 
He kicked the thing into the gutter, and then, to avoid the crowd, turned 
down a side-street to the right Within three or four minutes he was out of the 
area which the bomb had affected, and the sordid swarming life of the streets 
was gomg on as though nothing had happened It was nearly twenty hours, and 
the drmkmg-shops which the proles frequented (‘pubs’, they called them) 
were choked with customers From their grimy swing doors, endlessly 
opening and shutting, there came forth a smell of urme, sawdust, and sour 
beer In an angle formed by a projecting housefront three men were standing 
very close together, the middle one of them holding a folded-up newspaper 
which the other two were studying over his shoulder Even before he was near 
enough to make out the expression on their faces, Winston could see 
absorption m every line of their bodies, It was obviously some serious piece of 
news that they were reading He was a few paces away from them when 
suddenly the group broke up and two of the men were in violent altercation 
For a moment they seemed almost on the point of blows ■' 1 > 

- f Can’t you bleeding well listen to what I say? I tell you no number ending in 
sevenam’t won forever fourteen months!’ 

‘^es^ltfasi then! ’ 

it ’as not 1 Back ’orae I got the ’ole lot of ’em for over two years wrote 



Nmet een Eighty-Four 793 

down on a piece of paper I takes ’em down reg’lar as the clock An’ I tell you, 
no number ending m seven-’ 

‘Yes, a seven ’as won 1 1 could pretty near tell you the bleeding number Four 
oh seven, it ended m It were m February-second week m February ’ 
‘February your grandmother 1 1 got it all down m black and white An 5 1 tell 
you, no number-’ 

‘Oh, pack it in 1 ’ said the third man 

They were talking about the Lottery Winston looked back when he had 
gone thirty metres They were still arguing, with vivid, passionate faces The 
Lottery, with its weekly pay-out of enormous prizes, was the one public event 
to which the proles paid serious attention It was probable that there were 
some millions of proles for whom the Lottery was the principal if not the only 
reason for remaining alive It was their delight, their folly, their anodyne, their 
intellectual stimulant Where the Lottery was concerned, even people who 
could barely read and write seemed capable of intricate calculations and 
staggering feats of memory There was a whole tribe of men who made a living 
simply by selling systems, forecasts, and lucky amulets Wmston had nothing 
to do with the running of the Lottery, which was managed by the Ministry of 
Plenty, but he was aware (indeed everyone m the Party was aware) that the 
prizes were largely imaginary Only small sums were actually paid out, the 
winners of the big prizes being non-existent persons In the absence of any real 
inter-communication between one part of Oceania and another, this was not 
difficult to arrange 

But if there was hope, it lay m the proles You had to cling on to that When 
you put it in words it sounded reasonable it was when you looked at the human 
beings passing you on the pavement that it became an act of faith The street 
into which he had turned ran downhill He had a feeling that he had been m 
this neighbourhood before, and that there was a mam thoroughfare not far 
away From somewhere ahead there came a dm of shouting voices The street 
took a sharp turn and then ended in a flight of steps which led down into a 
sunken alley where a few stall-keepers were selling tired-lookmg vegetables At 
this moment Wmston remembered where he was The alley led out into the mam 
street, and down the next turning, not five minutes away, was the junk shop 
where he had bought the blank book which was now his diary And in a small 
stationer’s shop not far away he had bought his penholder and his bottle of ink 
He paused for a moment at the top of the steps On the opposite side of the 
alley there was a dingy little pub whose windows appeared to be frosted over 
but in reality were merely coated with dust A very old man, bent but active, 
with white moustaches that bristled forward like those of a prawn, pushed 
open the swing door and went m As Wmston stood watching, it occurred to 
him that the old man, who must be eighty at the least, had already been 
middle-raged when the Revolution happened He and a few others like him 
were the last links that now existed with the vanished world of capitalism. In 
the Party itself there were not many people left whose ideas had been formed 
before the Revolution The older generation had mostly been wiped out in the 
great purges of the ’fifties and ’sixties, and the few who survived had long ago 



7 94 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

been terrified into complete intellectual surrender If there was any one still 
alive who could give you a truthful account of conditions in the early part of 
the century, it could only be a prole Suddenly the passage from the history 
book that he had copied into his diary came back into Winston’s mind, and a 
lunatic impulse took hold of him He would go into the pub, he would scrape 
acquaintance with that old man and question him He would say to him ‘Tell 
me about your life when you were a boy What was it like m those days? Were 
things better than they are now, or were they worse?’ 

Hurriedly, lest he should have time to become frightened, he descended the 
steps and crossed the narrow street It was madness of course As usual, there 
was no definite rule against talking to proles and frequenting their pubs, but it 
was far too unusual an action to pass unnoticed If the patrols appeared he 
might plead an attack of faintness, but it was not likely that they would believe 
him He pushed open the door, and a hideous cheesy smell of sour beer hit him 
in the face As he entered the din of voices dropped to about half its volume 
Behind his back he could feel everyone eyeing his blue overalls A game of 
darts which was going on at the other end of the room interrupted itself for 
perhaps as much as thirty seconds The old man whom he had followed was 
standing at the bar, having some kind of altercation with the barman, a large, 
stout, hook-nosed young man with enormous forearms A knot of others, 
standing round with glasses m their hands, were watchmg the scene 
‘I arst you civil enough, didn’t I?’ said the old man, straightening his 
shoulders pugnaciously ‘You telling me you ain’t got a pint mug in the ’ole 
bleeding boozer?’ 

‘And what in hell’s name is a pint?’ said the barman, leamng forward with 
the tips of his fingers on the counter 

°Ark at ’im f Calls ’isself a barman and don’t know what a pint is* Why, a 
pint’s the ’alf of a quart, and there’s four quarts to the gallon ’Ave to teach you 
the A, B, C next ’ 

‘Never heard of ’em,’ said the barman shortly ‘Litre and half litre-that’s all 
we serve There’s the glasses on the shelf m front of you ’ 

‘I likes a pint,’ persisted the old man ‘You could ’a drawed me off a pint easy 
enough We didn’t ’ave these bleeding litres when I was a young man ’ 

‘When you were a young^ man we were all living in the treetops,’ said the 
barman, with a glance at the other customers 
There was a shout of laughter, and the uneasiness caused by Winston’s entry 
seemed to disappear The old man’s white-stubbled face had flushed pink He 
turned away, muttering to himself, and bumped into Wmston Winston 
caught him gently by the arm 
‘May I offer you a drink?’ he said 

‘You’re a gent,’ said the other, straightening his shoulders again He 
appeared not to have noticed Winston’s blue overalls. ‘Pint'’ he added 
aggressively to the barman. ‘Pint of wallop ’ 

The barman swished two half-litres of dark-brown beer into thick glasses 
which he had rinsed m a bucket under the counter. Beer was the only drink you 
could get m prole pubs The proles were supposed not to drink gm, though in 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 795 

practice they could get hold of it easily enough The game of darts was in full 
swing again, and the knot of men at the bar had begun talking about lottery 
tickets Winston’s presence was forgotten for a moment There was a deal table 
under the window where he and the old man could talk without fear of being 
overheard It was horribly dangerous, but at any rate there was no telescreen m 
the room, a point he had made sure of as soon as he came in 

”E could ’a drawed me off a pint,’ grumbled the old man as he settled down 
behind his glass ‘A ’alf litre ain’t enough It don’t satisfy And a ’ole litre’s too 
much It starts my bladder running. Let alone the price ’ 

‘You must have seen great changes since you were a young man,’ said 
Winston tentatively 

The old man’s pale blue eyes moved from the dart board to the bar, and from 
the bar to the door of the Gents, as though it were in the bar-room that he 
expected the changes to have occurred, 

‘The beer was better,’ he said finally ‘And cheaper 1 When I was a young 
man, mild beer-wallop we used to call lt-was fourpence a pint That was 
before the war, of course ’ 

‘Which war was that’’ said Winston 

‘It’s all wars,’ said the old man vaguely He took up his glass, and his 
shoulders straightened again ‘’Ere’s wishing you the very best of ’ealth 1 ’ 

In his lean throat the sharp-pointed Adam’s apple made a surprisingly rapid 
up-and-down movement, and the beer vanished Winston went to the bar and 
came back with two more half-litres The old man appeared to have forgotten 
his prejudice against drinking a full litre 

‘You are very much older than I am,’ said Winston ‘You must have been a 
grown man before I was born You can remember what it was like m the old 
days, before the Revolution People of my age don’t really know anything 
about those times We can only read about them in books, and what it says in 
the books may not be true I should like your opimon on that The history 
books say that life before the Revolution was completely different from what it 
is now There was the most terrible oppression, injustice, poverty- worse than 
anything we can imagine Here in London, the great mass of the people never 
had enough to eat from birth to death. Half of them hadn’t even boots on their 
feet They worked twelve hours a day, they left school at nine, they slept ten m 
a room And at the same time there were a very few people, only a few 
thousands-the capitalists, they were called-who were rich and powerful 
They owned everything that there was to own They lived m great gorgeous 
houses with thirty servants, they rode about in motor-cars and four-horse 
carriages, they drank champagne, they wore top hats-’ 

The old man brightened suddenly 

‘Top ’ats!’ he said. ‘Funny you should mention ’em. The same thing come 
into my ’ead only yesterday, I dono why. I was jest thinking, I ain’t seen a top 
’at m years Gom right out, they ’ave. The last time I wore one was at my 
sister-in-law’s funeral And that was- well, I couldn’t give you the date, but it 
must’a been fifty years ago Of course it was only ’ired for the occasion, you 
understand ’ 



7p6 Nineteen Eighty -Four 

‘It isn’t very important about the top hats,’ said Winston patiently ‘The 
point is, these capitalists -they and a few lawyers and priests and so forth who 
lived on them-were the lords of the earth Everything existed for their benefit 
You-the ordinary people, the workers-were their slaves They could do what 
they liked with you They could ship you off to Canada like cattle They could 
sleep with your daughters if they chose They could order you to be flogged 
with something called a cat-o’-mne tails You had to take your cap off when 
you passed them Every capitalist went about with a gang of lackeys who-’ 

The old man brightened again 

‘Lackeys 1 ’ he said ‘Now there’s a word I ain’t ’eard since ever so long 
Lackeys 1 That reg’lar takes me back, that does I recollect-oh, donkey’s years 
ago-I used to sometimes go to ’Yde Park of a Sunday afternoon to ’ear the 
blokes making speeches Salvation Army, Roman Catholics, Jews, Indians-all 
sorts there was And there was one bloke-well, I couldn’t give you ’is name, 
but a real powerful speaker, ’e was ’E didn’t ’alf give it ’em' “Lackeys'” ’e 
says, “lackeys of the bourgeoisie' Flunkies of the ruling class'” Parasites-that 
was another of them And ’yenas-’e definitely called ’em ’yenas Of course ’e 
was referring to the Labour Party, you understand ’ 

Winston had the feeling that they were talking at cross-purposes 

‘What I really wanted to know was this,’ he said ‘Do you feel that you have 
more freedom now than you had in those days 71 Are you treated more like a 
human being 71 In the old days, the rich people, the people at the top-’ 

‘The ’Ouse of Lords,’ put in the old man reminiscently 

‘The House of Lords, if you like What I am asking is, were these people able 
to treat you as an mfenor, simply because they were rich and you were poor 71 Is 
it a fact, for instance, that you had to call them “Sir” and take off your cap 
when you passed them 71 ’ 

The old man appeared to think deeply He drank off about a quarter of his 
beer before answering 

‘Yes,’ he said ‘They liked you to touch your cap to ’em It showed respect, 
like I didn’t agree with it, myself, but I done it often enough Had to, as you 
might say ’ 

‘And was it usual-I’m only quoting what I’ve read m history books-was it 
usual for these people and their servants to push you off the pavement into the 
gutter 71 ’ 

‘One of ’em pushed me once,’ said the old man ‘I recollect it as if it was 
yesterday It was Boat Race night-terribly rowdy they used to get on Boat 
Race mght-and I bumps into a young bloke on Shaftesbury Avenue Quite the 
gent, ’e was-dress shirt, top ’at, black overcoat ’E was kind of zigzagging 
across the pavement, and I bumps into ’im accidental-like ’E says, “Why can’t 
you look where you’re going 71 ” ’e says I say, “Ju think you’ve bought the 
bleeding pavement 71 ” ’E says, “I’ll twist your bloody ’ead off if you get fresh 
with me ” I says, “You’re drunk I’ll give you in charge m ’alf a minute,” I 
says, An’ if you’ll believe me, ’e puts ’is ’and on my chest and gives me a shove 
as pretty near sent me under the wheels of a bus Well, I was young m them 
days, and I was going to ’ave fetched ’im one, only-’ 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 797 

A sense of helplessness took hold of Winston The old man’s memory was 
nothing but a rubbish-heap of details One could question him all day without 
getting any real information The Party histones might still be true, after a 
fashion they might even be completely true He made a last attempt 

‘Perhaps I have not made myself clear,’ he said ‘What I’m trying to say is 
this You have been alive a very long time, you lived half your life before the 
Revolution In 1925, for instance, you were already grown up Would you say, 
from what you can remember, that life in 1925 was better than it is now, or 
worse? If you could choose, would you prefer to live then or now?’ 

The old man looked meditatively at the dart board He finished up his beer, 
more slowly than before When he spoke it was with a tolerant, philosophic air, 
as though the beer had mellowed him 

‘I know what you expect me to say,’ he said ‘You expect me to say as I’d 
sooner be young again Most people’ d say they’d sooner be young, if you arst 
’em You got your ’ealth and strength when you’re young When you get to my 
time of life you ain’t never well I suffer something wicked from my feet, and 
my bladder’s jest terrible Six and seven times a night it ’as me out of bed On 
the other ’and, there’s great advantages m being a old man You ain’t got the 
same worries No truck with women, and that’s a great thing I ain’t ’ad a 
woman for near on thirty year, if you’d credit it Nor wanted to, what’s more ’ 
Winston sat back against the window-sill It was no use going on He was 
about to buy some more beer when the old man suddenly got up and shuffled 
rapidly into the stinking urinal at the side of the room The extra half-litre was 
already working on him Winston sat for a minute or two gazing at his empty 
glass, and hardly noticed when his feet carried him out into the street again 
Within twenty years at the most, he reflected, the huge and simple question, 
‘Was life better before the Revolution than it is now?’ would have ceased once 
and for all to be answerable But in effect it was unanswerable even now, since 
the few scattered survivors from the ancient world were incapable of 
comparing one age with another They remembered a million useless things, a 
quarrel with a workmate, a hunt for a lost bicycle pump, the expression on a 
long-dead sister’s face, the swirls of dust on a windy morning seventy years 
ago but all the relevant facts were outside the range of their vision They were 
like the ant, which can see small objects but not large ones And when memory 
failed and written records were falsified- when that happened, the claim of the 
Party to have improved the conditions of human life had got to be accepted, 
because there did not exist, and never again could exist, any standard against 
which it could be tested 

At this moment his tram of thought stopped abruptly He halted and looked 
up He was m a narrow street, with a few dark little shops interspersed among 
dwellmg-houses Immediately above his head there hung three discoloured 
metal balls which looked as if they had once been gilded He seemed to know 
the place Of course' He was standing outside the junk-shop where he had 
bought the diary 

A twinge of fear went through him It had been a sufficiently rash act to buy 
the book in the beginning, and he had sworn never to come near the place 



79# Nineteen Eighty-Four 

again And yet the instant that he allowed his thoughts to wander, his feet had 
brought him back here of their own accord It was precisely against suicidal 
impulses of this kind that he had hoped to guard himself by opening the diary 
At the same time he noticed that although it was nearly twenty-one hours the 
shop was still open With the feeling that he would be less conspicuous inside 
than hanging about on the pavement, he stepped through the doorway If 
questioned, he could plausibly say that he was trying to buy razor blades 

The proprietor had just lighted a hanging oil lamp which gave off an unclean 
but friendly smell He was a man of perhaps sixty, frail and bowed, with a long, 
benevolent nose, and mild eyes distorted by thick spectacles His hair was 
almost white, but his eyebrows were bushy and still black His spectacles, his 
gentle, fussy movements, and the fact that he was wearing an aged jacket of 
black velvet, gave him a vague air of intellectuality, as though he had been 
some kind of literary man, or perhaps a musician His voice was soft, as though 
faded, and his accent less debased than that of the majority of proles 

‘I recognized you on the pavement,’ he said immediately ‘You’re the 
gentleman that bought the young lady’s keepsake album That was a beautiful 
bit of paper, that was Cream-laid, it used to be called There’s been no paper 
like that made for-oh, I dare say fifty years ’ He peered at Wmston over the 
top of his spectacles ‘Is there anything special I can do for you’ Or did you just 
want to look round’’ 

‘I was passing,’ said Winston vaguely ‘I just looked m I don’t want 
anything m particular ’ 

‘It’s just as well,’ said the other, ‘because I don’t suppose I could have 
satisfied you ’ He made an apologetic gesture with his soft-palmed hand ‘You 
see how it is, an empty shop, you might say Between you and me, the antique 
trade’s just about finished No demand any longer, and no stock either 
Furniture, china, glass-it’s all been broken up by degrees And of course the 
metal stuff’s mostly been melted down I haven’t seen a brass candlestick in 
years ’ 

The tiny interior of the shop was m fact uncomfortably full, but there was 
almost nothing in it of the slightest value The floorspac$j$&s very restricted, 
because all round the walls were stacked innumerable dusty picture-frames In 
the window there were trays of nuts and bolts, worn-out chisels, penknives 
with broken blades, tarnished watches that did not even pretend to be m going 
order, and other miscellaneous rubbish Only on a small table in the corner was 
there a litter of odds and ends-lacquered snuffboxes, agate brooches, and the 
like- which looked as though they might include something interesting As 
Winston wandered towards the table his eye was caught by a round, smooth 
thing that gleamed softly in the lamplight, and he picked it up 

It was a heavy lump of glass, curved on one side, fiat on the other, making 
almost a hemisphere There was a peculiar softness, as of rainwater, m both the 
colour, and the texture of the glass At the heart of it, magnified by the curved 
surface, there was a strange, pink, convoluted object that recalled a rose or a sea 
anemone, 

‘What is it?’ said Winston, fascinated 



Nineteen Eighty-Four ypp 

‘That’s coral, that is,’ said the old man ‘It must have come from the Indian 
Ocean They used to kind of embed it m the glass That wasn’t made less than a 
hundred years ago More, by the look of it ’ 

‘It’s a beautiful thing,’ said Winston 

‘It is a beautiful thing,’ said the other appreciatively ‘But there’s not many 
that’d say so nowadays ’ He coughed ‘Now, if it so happened that you wanted 
to buy it, that’d cost you four dollars I can remember when a thing like that 
would have fetched eight pounds, and eight pounds was- well, I can’t work it 
out, but it was a lot of money But who cares about genuine antiques 
nowadays-even the few that’s left^’ 

Winston immediately paid over the four dollars and slid the coveted thing 
into his pocket What appealed to him about it was not so much its beauty as 
the air it seemed to possess of belongmg to an age quite different from the 
present one The soft, ramwatery glass was not like any glass that he had ever 
seen The thing was doubly attractive because of its apparent uselessness, 
though he could guess that it must once have been intended as a paperweight 
It was very heavy in his pocket, but fortunately it did not make much of a 
bulge It was a queer thing, even a compromising thing, for a Party member to 
have m his possession Anything old, and for that matter anything beautiful, 
was always vaguely suspect The old man had grown noticeably more cheerful 
after receiving the four dollars Wmston realized that he would have accepted 
three or even two 

‘There’s another room upstairs that you might care to take a look at,’ he said 
‘There’s not much in it Just a few pieces We’ll do with a light if we’re going 
upstairs ’ 

He lit another lamp, and, with bowed back, led the way slowly up the steep 
and worn stairs and along a tiny passage, into a room which did not give on the 
street but looked out on a cobbled yard and a forest of chimney-pots Winston 
noticed that the furniture was still arranged as though the room were meant to 
be lived m There was a strip of carpet on the floor, a picture or two on the 
walls, and a deep, slatternly armchair drawn up to the fireplace An old- 
fashioned glass clock with a twelve-hour face was tickmg away on the 
mantelpiece Under the window, and occupying nearly a quarter of the room, 
was an enormous bed with the mattress still on it 

‘We lived here till my wife died,’ said the old man half apologetically ‘I’m 
selling the furniture off by little and little. Now that’s a beautiful mahogany 
bed, or at least it would be if you could get the bugs out of it But I dare say 
you’d find it a little bit cumbersome ’ 

He was holding the lamp high up, so as to illumine the whole room, and in 
the warm dim light the place looked curiously inviting The thought flitted 
through Wmston’s mind that it would probably be quite easy to rent the room 
for a few dollars a week, if he dared to take the risk It was a wild, impossible 
notion, to be abandoned as soon as thought of, but the room had awakened in 
him a sort of nostalgia, a sort of ancestral memory. It seemed to him that he 
knew exactly what it felt like to sit m a room like this, in an armchair beside an 
open fire with your feet in the fender and a kettle on the hob, utterly alone, 



800 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

utterly secure, with nobody watching you, no voice pursuing you, no sound 
except the singing of the kettle and the friendly ticking of the clock 
‘There’s no telescreen*’ he could not help murmuring 
‘Ah,’ said the old man, ‘I never had one of those things Too expensive And 
I never seemed to feel the need of it, somehow Now that’s a nice gateleg table 
in the corner there Though of course you’d have to put new hinges on it if you 
wanted to use the flaps ’ 

There was a small bookcase m the other corner, and Winston had already 
gravitated towards it It contained nothing but rubbish The huntmg-down 
and destruction of books had been done with the same thoroughness m the 
prole quarters as everywhere else It was very unlikely that there existed 
anywhere m Oceania a copy of a book printed earlier than i960 The old man, 
still carrying the lamp, was standing in front of a picture m a rosewood frame 
which hung on the other side of the fireplace, opposite the bed 

‘Now, if you happen to be interested m old prints at all-*’ he began 
delicately 

Wmston came across to examine the picture It was a steel engraving of an 
oval building with rectangular windows, and a small tower in front There was 
a railing running round the building, and at the rear end there was what 
appeared to be a statue Winston gazed at it for some moments It seemed 
vaguely familiar, though he did not remember the statue 

‘The frame’s fixed to the wall,’ said the old man, ‘but I could unscrew it for 
you, I dare say ’ 

‘I know that building,’ said Wmston finally ‘It’s a rum now It’s in the 
middle of the street outside the Palace of Justice ’ 

‘That’s right Outside the Law Courts It was bombed m-oh, many years 
ago It was a church at one time St Clement Danes, its name was ’ He smiled 
apologetically, as though conscious of saying something slightly ridiculous, 
and added ‘Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement’s*’ 

‘What’s that^’ said Winston 

‘Oh~“Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement’s ” That was a 
rhyme we had when I was a little boy. How it goes on I don’t remember, but I 
do know it ended up, “Here comes a candle to light you to bed. Here comes a 
chopper to chop off your head ” It was a kind of a dance They held out their 
arms for you to pass under, and when they came to “Here comes a chopper to 
chop off your head” they brought their arms down and caught you It was just 
names of churches All the London churches were m it— all the principal ones, 
that is ’ 

Winston wondered vaguely to what century the church belonged It was 
always difficult to determine the age of a London building Anything large and 
impressive, if it was reasonably new in appearance, was automatically claimed 
as having been built since the Revolution, while anything that was obviously of 
earlier date was ascribed to some dim period called the Middle Ages The 
centunes of capitalism were held to have produced nothing of any value One 
could not learn history from architecture any more than one could learn it from 
books Statues, inscriptions, memorial stones, the names of streets-anythmg 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 801 

that might throw light upon the past had been systematically altered 

‘I never knew it had been a church,’ he said 

‘There’s a lot of them left, really,’ said the old man, ‘though they’ve been put 
to other uses Now, how did that rhyme go’ Ah' I’ve got it* 

“Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement’s, 

You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin’s-” 

there, now, that’s as far as I can get A farthing, that was a small copper com, 
looked something like a cent ’ 

‘Where was St Martin’s’’ said Winston 

‘St Martin’s? That’s still standing It’s m Victory Square, alongside the 
picture gallery A building with a kind of a triangular porch and pillars in 
front, and a big flight of steps ’ 

Wmston knew the place well It was a museum used for propaganda displays 
of various kinds-scale models of rocket bombs and Floating Fortresses, wax- 
work tableaux illustrating enemy atrocities, and the like 

‘St Martm’s-m-the-Fields it used to be called,’ supplemented the old man, 
‘though I don’t recollect any fields anywhere in those parts ’ 

Winston did not buy the picture It would have been an even more 
mcongruous possession than the glass paperweight, and impossible to carry 
home, unless it were taken out of its frame But he lingered for some mmutes 
more, talking to the old man, whose name, he discovered, was not Weeks-as 
one might have gathered from the inscription over the shop-front-but 
Charrmgton Mr Charnngton, it seemed, was a widower aged sixty-three and 
had inhabited this shop for thirty years Throughout that time he had been 
intending to alter the name over the window, but had never quite got to the 
point of doing it All the while that they were talking the half-remembered 
rhyme kept running through Winston’s head Oranges and lemons say the 
bells of St Clement’s, You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin’s* 
It was curious, but when you said it to yourself you had the illusion of actually 
hearing bells, the bells of a lost London that still existed somewhere or other, 
disguised and forgotten From one ghostly steeple after another he seemed to 
hear them pealing forth Yet so far as he could remember he had never m real 
life heard church bells rmging 

He got away from Mr Charnngton and went down the stairs alone, so as not 
to let the old man see him reconnoitring the street before stepping out of the 
door He had already made up his mind that after a suitable interval-a month, 
say-he would take die risk of visiting the shop again It was perhaps not more 
dangerous than shirking an evening at the Centre The serious piece of folly 
had been to come back here in the first place, after buying the diary and 
without knowing whether the proprietor of the shop could be trusted. 
However-l 

Yes, he thought again, he would come back He would buy further scraps of 
beautiful rubbish He would buy the engraving of St Clement Danes, take it 
out of its frame, and carry it home concealed under the jacket of his overalls 
He would drag the rest of that poem out of Mr Charnngton’s memory Even 



802 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

the lunatic project of renting the room upstairs flashed momentarily through 
his mind again For perhaps five seconds exaltation made him careless, and he 
stepped out on to the pavement without so much as a preliminary glance 
through the window He had even started humming to an improvised tune- 

Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement’s, 

You owe me three farthings, say the- 

Suddenly his heart seemed to turn to ice and his bowels to water A figure m 
blue overalls was coming down the pavement, not ten metres away It was the 
girl from the Fiction Department, the girl with dark hair The light was failing, 
but there was no difficulty m recognizing her She looked him straight in the 
face, then walked quickly on as though she had not seen him 

For a few seconds Winston was too paralysed to move Then he turned to 
the right and walked heavily away, not noticing for the moment that he was 
going in the wrong direction At any rate, one question was settled There was 
no doubting any longer that the girl was spying on him She must have 
followed him here, because it was not credible that by pure chance she should 
have happened to be walking on the same evening up the same obscure back- 
street, kilometres distant from any quarter where Party members lived It was 
too great a coincidence Whether she was really an agent of the Thought 
Police, or simply an amateur spy actuated by officiousness, hardly mattered It 
was enough that she was watching him Probably she had seen him go into the 
pub as well 

It was an effort to walk The lump of glass in his pocket banged against his 
thigh at each step, and he was half minded to take it out and throw it away The 
worst thing was the pam in his belly For a couple of minutes he had the feeling 
that he would die if he did not reach a lavatory soon But there would be no 
public lavatories m a quarter like this Then the spasm passed, leaving a dull 
ache behind 

The street was a blind alley Winston halted, stood for several seconds 
wondermg vaguely what to do, then turned round and began to retrace his 
steps As he turned it occurred to him that the girl had only passed him three 
minutes ago and that by running he could probably catch up with her He 
could keep on her track till they were in some quiet place, and then smash her 
skull m with a cobblestone The piece of glass in his pocket would be heavy 
enough for the job But he abandoned the idea immediately, because even the 
thought of making any physical effort was unbearable He could not run, he 
could not strike a blow. Besides, she was young and lusty and would defend 
herself. He thought also of hurrying to the Community Centre and staying 
there till the place closed, so as to establish a partial alibi for the evening But 
that too was impossible A deadly lassitude had taken hold of him All he 
wanted was to get home quickly and then sit down and be quiet 

It was after twenty-two hours when he got back to the flat The lights would 
be switched off at the main at twenty-three thirty He went into the kitchen and 
swallowed nearly a teacupful of Victory Gin Then he went to the table m the 
alcove, sat down, and took the diary out of the drawer But he did not open it at 



Nineteen Eighty-F our 803 

once From the telescreen a brassy female voice was squalling a patriotic song 
He sat staring at the marbled cover of the book, trying without success to shut 
the voice out of his consciousness 

It was at mght that they came for you, always at night The proper thing was 
to kill yourself before they got you Undoubtedly some people did so Many of 
the disappearances were actually suicides But it needed desperate courage to 
kill yourself in a world where firearms, or any quick and certain poison, were 
completely unprocurable He thought with a kind of astonishment of the 
biological uselessness of pain and fear, the treachery of the human body which 
always freezes into inertia at exactly the moment when a special effort is 
1 needed He might have silenced the dark-haired girl if only he had acted 
quickly enough but precisely because of the extremity of his danger he had 
lost the power to act (It struck him that in moments of crisis one is never 
fighting against an external enemy, but always against one’s own body Even 
now, in spite of the gm, the dull ache in his belly made consecutive thought 
impossible And it is the same, he perceived, in all seemingly heroic or tragic 
situations On the battlefield, m the torture chamber, on a sinking ship, the 
issues that you are fighting for are always forgotten, because the body swells up 
until it fills the universe, and even when you are not paralysed by fright or 
screaming with pain, life is a moment-to-moment struggle against hunger or 
cold or sleeplessness, against a sour stomach or an aching tooth) 

He opened the diary It was important to write something down The 
woman on the telescreen had started a new song Her voice seemed to stick into 
his brain like jagged splinters of glass He tried to think of O’Brien, for whom, 
or to whom, the diary was written, but instead he began thinking of the things 
that would happen to him after the Thought Police took him away It would 
not matter if they killed you at once To be killed was what you expected But 
before death (nobody spoke of such things, yet everybody knew of them) there 
was the routine of confession that had to be gone through the grovelling on the 
floor and screaming for mercy, the crack of broken bones, the smashed teeth, 
and bloody clots of hair Why did you have to endure it, since the end was 
always the same? Why was it not possible to cut a few days or weeks out of your 
life? Nobody ever escaped detection, and nobody ever failed to confess When 
once you had succumbed to thoughtcrime it was certain that by a given date 
you would be dead Why then did that horror, which altered nothing, have to 
lie embedded in future time? 

He tried with a little more success than before to summon up the image of 
O’Brien. ‘We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,’ O’Brien had 
said to him He knew what it meant, or thought he knew The place where 
there is no darkness was the imagined future, which one would never see, but 
which, by foreknowledge, one could mystically share in. But with the voice 
from file telescreen nagging at his ears he could not follow the tram of thought 
further He put a cigarette m his mouth Half the tobacco promptly fell out on 
to his tongue, a bitter dust which was difficult to spit out again The face of Big 
Brother swam mto his mind, displacing that of O’Brien Just as he had done a 
few days earlier, he slid a com out of his pocket and looked at it The face gazed 



804 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

up at him, heavy, calm, protecting but what kind of smile was hidden beneath 
the dark moustache? Like a leaden knell the words came back at him 


WAR IS PEACE 
FREEDOM IS SLAVERY 
IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH 



PART II 


i 


It was the middle of the morning, and Winston had left the cubicle to go to the 
lavatory 

A solitary figure was coming towards him from the other end of the long, 
brightly lit corridor It was the girl with dark hair Four days had gone past 
since the evening when he had run into her outside the junk-shop As she came 
nearer he saw that her right arm was in a sling, not noticeable at a distance 
because it was of the same colour as her overalls Probably she had crushed her 
hand while swinging round one of the big kaleidoscopes on which the plots of 
novels were ‘roughed m’ It was a common accident m the Fiction 
Department 

They were perhaps four metres apart when the girl stumbled and fell almost 
flat on her face A sharp cry of pam was wrung out of her She must have fallen 
right on the injured arm Winston stopped short The girl had risen to her 
knees Her face had turned a milky yellow colour against which her mouth 
stood out redder than ever Her eyes were fixed on his, with an appealing 
expression that looked more like fear than pam 

A curious emotion stirred in Winston’s heart In front of him was an enemy 
who was trying to kill him* m front of him, also, was a human creature, m pam 
and perhaps with a broken bone Already he had instinctively started forward 
to help her In the moment when he had seen her fall on the bandaged arm, it 
had been as though he felt the pam in his own body 

‘You’re hurt?’ he said 

‘It’s nothing My arm It’ll be all right m a second ’ 

She spoke as though her heart were fluttering She had certainly turned very 
pale 

‘You haven’t broken anything?’ 

‘No, I’m all right It hurt for a moment, that’s all ’ 

She held out her free hand to him, and he helped her up She had regained 
some of her colour, and appeared very much better. 

‘It’s nothing,’ she repeated shortly ‘I only gave my wrist a bit of a bang 
Thanks, comrade 1 ’ 

And with that she walked on m the direction m which she had been going, as 



806 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

briskly as though it had really been nothing The whole incident could not 
have taken as much as half a minute Not to let one’s feelings appear m one’s 
face was a habit that had acquired the status of an instinct, and in any case they 
had been standing straight in front of a telescreen when the thing happened 
Nevertheless it had been very difficult not to betray a momentary surprise, for 
in the two or three seconds while he was helping her up the girl had slipped 
something into his hand There was no question that she had done it 
intentionally It was something small and flat As he passed through the 
lavatory door he transferred it to his pocket and felt it with the tips of his 
fingers It was a scrap of paper folded into a square 

While he stood at the urinal he managed, with a little more fingering, to get it 
unfolded Obviously there must be a message of some kind written on it For a 
moment he was tempted to take it into one of the water-closets and read it at 
once But that would be shocking folly, as he well knew There was no place 
where you could be more certain that the telescreens were watched 
continuously 

He went back to his cubicle, sat down, threw the fragment of paper casually 
among the other papers on the desk, put on his spectacles and hitched the 
speakwnte towards him ‘Five minutes,’ he told himself, ‘five minutes at the 
very least 1 ’ His heart bumped m his breast with frightening loudness 
Fortunately the piece of work he was engaged on was mere routine, the 
rectification of a long list of figures, not needing close attention 

Whatever was written on the paper, it must have some kind of political 
meaning So far as he could see there were two possibilities One, much the 
more likely, was that the girl was an agent of the Thought Police, just as he had 
feared He did not know why the Thought Police should choose to deliver their 
messages in such a fashion, but perhaps they had their reasons The thing that 
was written on the paper might be a threat, a summons, an order to commit 
suicide, a trap of some description But there was another, wilder possibility 
that kept raising its head, though he tried vainly to suppress it This was, that 
the message did not come from the Thought Police at all, but from some kind 
of underground organization Perhaps the Brotherhood existed after all 1 
Perhaps the girl was part of it 1 No doubt the idea was absurd, but it had sprung 
into his mind m the very instant of feelmg the scrap of paper m his hand It was 
not till a couple of minutes later that the other, more probable explanation had 
occurred to him And even now, though his intellect told him that the message 
probably meant death-still, that was not what he believed, and the 
unreasonable hope persisted, and his heart banged, and it was with difficulty 
that he kept his voice from trembling as he murmured his figures into the 
speakwrite 

He rolled up the completed bundle of work and slid it into the pneumatic 
tube. Eight minutes had gone by He readjusted his spectacles on his nose, 
sighed, and drew the next batch of work towards him, with the scrap of paper 
On top of it. He flattened it out On it was written, m a large unformed 
handwriting 

i 


I love you 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 807 

For several seconds he was too stunned even to throw the incriminating 
thing into the memory hole When he did so, although he knew very well the 
danger of showing too much interest, he could not resist reading it once again, 
just to make sure that the words were really there 

For the rest of the mormng it was very difficult to work What was even 
worse than having to focus his mind on a series of niggling jobs was the need to 
conceal his agitation from the telescreen He felt as though a fire were burning 
in his belly Lunch m the hot, crowded, noise-filled canteen was torment He 
had hoped to be alone for a little while during the lunch hour, but as bad luck 
would have it the imbecile Parsons flopped down beside him, the tang of his 
sweat almost defeating the tinny smell of stew, and kept up a stream of talk 
about the preparations for Hate Week He was particularly enthusiastic about 
a papier m&chd model of Big Brother’s head, two metres wide, which was being 
made for the occasion by his daughter’s troop of Spies The irritating thing 
was that in the racket of voices Winston could hardly hear what Parsons was 
saying, and was constantly having to ask for some fatuous remark to be 
repeated Just once he caught a glimpse of the girl, at a table with two other 
girls at the far end of the room She appeared not to have seen him, and he did 
not look m that direction again 

The afternoon was more bearable Immediately after lunch there arrived a 
delicate, difficult piece of work which would take several hours and 
necessitated putting everything else aside It consisted m falsifying a series of 
production reports of two years ago, m such a way as to cast discredit on a 
prominent member of the Inner Party, who was now under a cloud This was 
the kind of thing that Winston was good at, and for more than two hours, he 
succeeded m shutting the girl out of his mind altogether Then the memory of 
her face came back, and with it a raging, intolerable desire to be alone Until he 
could be alone it was impossible to think this new development out Tonight 
was one of his nights at the Community Centre He wolfed another tasteless 
meal m the canteen, hurried off to the Centre, took part in the solemn foolery 
of a ‘discussion group’, played two games of table tennis, swallowed several 
glasses of gin, and sat for half an hour through a lecture entitled ‘Ingsoc in 
relation to chess’ His soul writhed with boredom, but for once he had had no 
impulse to shirk his evening at the Centre At the sight of the words I love you 
the desire to stay alive had welled up m him, and the taking of minor risks 
suddenly seemed stupid. It was not till twenty-three hours, when he was home 
and in bed-m the darkness, where you were safe even from the telescreen so 
long as you kept silent-that he was able to think continuously 

It was a physical problem that had to be solved: how to get in touch with the 
girl and arrange a meeting He did not consider any longer the possibility that 
she might be laying some kind of trap for him He knew that it was not so, 
because of her unmistakable agitation when she handed him the note 
Obviously she had been frightened out of her wits, as well she might be. Nor 
did the idea of refusing her advances even cross his mmd Only five nights ago 
he had contemplated smashing her skull in with a cobblestone, but that was of 
no importance He thought of her naked, youthful body, as he had seen it in his 



808 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

dream He had imagined her a fool like all the rest of them, her head stuffed 
with lies and hatred, her belly full of ice A kind of fever seized him at the 
thought that he might lose her, the white youthful body might slip away from 
him 1 What he feared more than anything else was that she would simply 
change her mind if he did not get in touch with her quickly But the physical 
difficulty of meeting was enormous It was like trying to make a move at chess 
when you were already mated Whichever way you turned, the telescreen faced 
you Actually, all the possible ways of communicating with her had occurred to 
him within five minutes of reading the note, but now, with time to think, he 
went over them one by one, as though laying out a row of instruments on a 
table 

Obviously the kind of encounter that had happened this morning could not 
be repeated If she had worked in the Records Department it might have been 
comparatively simple, but he had only a very dim idea whereabouts m the 
building the Fiction Department lay, and he had no pretext for going there If 
he had known where she lived, f and at what time she left work, he could have 
contrived to meet her somewhere on her way home, but to try to follow her 
home was not safe, because it would mean loitering about outside the 
Ministry, which was bound to be noticed As for sending a letter through the 
mails, it was out of the question By a routine that was not even secret, all 
letters were opened in transit Actually, few people ever wrote letters For the 
messages that it was occasionally necessary to send, there were printed 
postcards with long lists of phrases, and you struck out the ones that were 
inapplicable. In any case he did not know the girl’s name, let alone her address 
Finally he decided that the safest place was the canteen If he could get her at a 
table by herself, somewhere m the middle of the room, not too near the 
telescreens, and with a sufficient buzz of conversation all round-if these 
conditions endured for, say, thirty seconds, it might be possible to exchange a 
few words 

For a week after this, life was like a restless dream On, the next day she did 
not appear m the canteen until he was leaving it, the whistle having already 
blown Presumably she had been changed on to a later shift They passed each 
other without a glance On the day after that she was in the canteen at the usual 
time, but with three other girls and immediately under a telescreen Then for 
three dreadful days she did not appear at all His whole mind and body seemed 
to be afflicted with an unbearable sensitivity, a sort of transparency, which 
made every movement, every sound, every contact, every word that he had to 
speak or listen to, an agony Even in sleep he could not altogether escape from 
her image. He did not touch the diary during those days If there was any 
relief, it was m his work, in which he could sometimes forget himself for ten 
minutes at a stretch He had absolutely no clue as to what had happened to her 
There was no enquiry he could make She might have been vaporized, she 
might have committed suicide, she might have been transferred to the other 
end of Oceania, worst and likeliest of all, she might simply have changed her 
mind and decided to avoid him 

- *Ttee next day she reappeared Her arm was out of the sling and she had a 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 809 

band of sticking-plaster round her wrist The relief of seeing her was so great 
that he could not resist staring directly at her for several seconds On the 
following day he very nearly succeeded in speaking to her When he came into 
the canteen she was sitting at a table well out from the wall, and was quite 
alone It was early, and the place was not very full The queue edged forward 
till Winston was almost at the counter, then was held up for two minutes 
because someone in front was complaining that he had not received his tablet 
of saccharine But the girl was still alone when Winston secured his tray and 
began to make for her table He walked casually towards her, his eyes searching 
for a place at some table beyond her She was perhaps three metres away from 
him Another two seconds would do it Then a voice behind him called, 
‘Smith*’ He pretended not to hear ‘Smith*’ repeated the voice, more loudly It 
was no use He turned round A blond-headed, silly-faced young man named 
Wilsher, whom he barely knew, was inviting him with a smile to a vacant place 
at his table It was not safe to refuse After having been recognized, he could 
not go and sit at a table with an unattended girl It was too noticeable He sat 
down with a friendly smile The silly blond face beamed into his Winston had 
a hallucination of himself smashing a pick-axe right into the middle of it The 
girl’s table filled up a few minutes later 

But she must have seen him coming towards her, and perhaps she would 
take the hint Next day he took care to arrive early Sure enough, she was at a 
table in about the same place, and again alone. The person immediately ahead 
of him m the queue was a small, swiftly moving, beetle-hke man with a flat face 
and tiny, suspicious eyes As Wmston turned away from the counter with his 
tray, he saw that the little man was making straight for the girl’s table His 
hopes sank again There was a vacant place at a table farther away, but 
somethmg in the little man’s appearance suggested that he would be 
sufficiently attentive to his own comfort to choose the emptiest table With ice 
at his heart Winston followed It was no use unless he could get the girl alone 
At this moment there was a tremendous crash The little man was sprawling on 
all fours, his tray had gone flying, two streams of soup and coffee were flowing 
across the floor He started to his feet with a malignant glance at Winston, 
whom he evidently suspected of having tripped him up But it was all right 
Five seconds later, with a thundering heart, Wmston was sitting at the girl’s 
table 

He did not look at her He unpacked his tray and promptly began eating It 
was all-important to speak at once, before anyone else came, but now a terrible 
fear had taken possession of him. A week had gone by since she had first 
approached him She would have changed her mmd, she must have changed 
her mmd* It was impossible that this affair should end successfully, such 
things did pot happen in real life He might have flinched altogether from 
speaking if at this moment he had not seen Ampkforth, the hairy-eared poet, 
wandering limply round the room with a tray, looking for a place to sit down 
In his vague way Ampleforth was attached to Winston, and would certainly sit 
down at his table If he caught sight of him. There was perhaps a manute in 
which to a et. Both Wmston and the girl were eating steadily. The stuff they 



8 io Nineteen Eighty -Four 

were eating was a thin stew, actually a soup, of haricot beans In a low murmur 
Wmston began speaking Neither of them looked up, steadily they spooned the 
watery stuff into their mouths, and between spoonfuls exchanged the few 
necessary words m low expressionless voices 
‘What time do you leave work?’ 

‘Eighteen thirty ’ 

‘Where can we meet?’ 

‘Victory Square, near the monument ’ 

‘It’s full of telescreens ’ 

‘It doesn’t matter if there’s a crowd ’ 

‘Any signal?’ 

‘No Don’t come up to me until you see me among a lot of people And don’t 
look at me Just keep somewhere near me ’ 

‘What time?’ 

‘Nineteen hours ’ 

‘All right ’ 

Ampleforth failed to see Wmston and sat down at another table They did 
not speak again, and, so far as it was possible for two people sitting on opposite 
sides of the same table, they did not look at one another The girl finished her 
lunch quickly and made off, while Wmston stayed to smoke a cigarette 
Winston was m Victory Square before the appointed time He wandered 
round the base of the enormous fluted column, at the top of which Big 
Brother’s statue gazed southward towards the skies where he had vanquished 
the Eurasian aeroplanes (the Eastasian aeroplanes, it had been, a few years ago) 
m the Battle of Airstrip One In the street in front of it there was a statue of a 
man on horseback which was supposed to represent Oliver Cromwell At five 
minutes past the hour the girl had still not appeared Again the terrible fear 
seized upon Winston She was not coming, she had changed her mind' He 
walked slowly up to the north side of the square and got a sort of pale-coloured 
pleasure from identifying St Martin’s Church, whose bells, when it had bells, 
had chimed ‘You owe me three farthings ’ Then he saw the girl standing at the 
base of the monument, reading or pretending to read a poster which ran 
spirally up the column It was not safe to go near her until some more people 
had accumulated There were telescreens all round the pediment But at this 
moment there was a dm of shouting and a zoom of heavy vehicles from 
somewhere to the left Suddenly everyone seemed to be running across the 
square The girl nipped nimbly round the lions at the base of the monument 
and joined m the rush Winston followed As he ran, he gathered from some 
shouted remarks that a convoy of Eurasian prisoners was passing 
Already a dense mass of people was blocking the south side of the square 
Wmston, at normal times the kind of person who gravitates to the outer edge of 
any kind of scrimmage, shoved, butted, squirmed his way forward into the 
heart of the crowd Soon he was withm arm’s length of the girl, but the way 
was blocked by an enormous prole and an almost equally enormous woman, 
presumably his wife, who seemed to form an impenetrable wall of flesh 
Winston wriggled himself sideways, and with a violent lunge managed to drive 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 811 

his shoulder between them For a moment it felt as though his entrails were 
being ground to pulp between the two muscular hips, then he had broken 
through, sweating a little He was next to the girl They were shoulder to 
shoulder, both staring fixedly in front of them. 

A long line of trucks, with wooden-faced guards armed with sub-machine 
guns standing upright in each corner, was passing slowly down the street In 
the trucks little yellow men m shabby greemsh uniforms were squatting, 
jammed close together Their sad, Mongolian faces gazed out over the sides of 
the trucks utterly mcunous Occasionally when a truck jolted there was a 
clank-clank of metal all the prisoners were wear mg leg-irons Truck-load 
after truck-load of the sad faces passed Winston knew they were there but he 
saw them only intermittently The girl’s shoulder, and her arm right down to 
the elbow, were pressed against his Her cheek was almost near enough for him 
to feel its warmth She had immediately taken charge of the situation, just as 
she had done m the canteen She began speaking m the same expressionless 
voice as before, with lips barely moving, a mere murmur easily drowned by the 
din of voices and the rumbling of the trucks 

‘Can you hear me ? ’ 

‘Yes’ 

‘Can you get Sunday afternoon off?’ 

‘Yes’ 

‘Then listen carefully You’ll have to remember this Go to Paddington 
Station-’ 

With a sort of military precision that astonished him, she outlined the route 
that he was to follow A half-hour railway journey, turn left outside the station, 
two kilometres along the road a gate with the top bar missing, a path across a 
field, a grass-grown lane, a track between bushes, a dead tree with moss on it 
It was as though she had a map inside her head ‘Can you remember all that?’ 
she murmured finally 

‘Yes’ 

‘You turn left, then right, then left again And the gate’s got no top bar ’ 

‘Yes What time?’ 

‘About fifteen You may have to wait I’ll get there by another way Are you 
sure you remember everything?’ 

‘Yes’ 

‘Then get away from me as quick as you can.’ 

She need not have told him that But for the moment they could not 
extricate themselves from the crowd The trucks were still filing past, the 
people still insatiably gaping. At the start there had been a few boos and hisses, 
but it came only from the Party members among the crowd, and had soon 
stopped The prevailing emotion was simply curiosity Foreigners, whether 
from Eurasia or from Eastasia, were a kind of strange animal One literally 
never saw them except in the guise of prisoners, and even as prisoners one 
never got more than a momentary glimpse of them Nor did one know what 
became of them, apart from the few who were hanged as war-cnmmals the 
others simply vanished, presumably into forced-labour camps The round 



8 12 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

Mongol faces had given way to faces of a more European type, dirty, bearded, 
and exhausted From over scrubby cheekbones eyes looked into Winston’s, 
sometimes with strange intensity, and flashed away again The convoy was 
drawing to an end In the last truck he could see an aged man, his face a mass of 
grizzled hair, standing upright with wrists crossed in front of him, as though 
he were used to having them bound together It was almost time for Winston 
and the girl to part But at the last moment, while the crowd still hemmed them 
in, her hand felt for his and gave it a fleeting squeeze 

It could not have been ten seconds, and yet it seemed a long time that their 
hands were clasped together He had time to learn every detail of her hand He 
explored the long fingers, the shapely nails, the work-hardened palm with its 
row of callouses, the smooth flesh under the wrist Merely from feeling it he 
would have known it by sight In the same instant it occurred to him that he 
did not know what colour the girl’s eyes were They were probably brown, but 
people with dark hair sometimes had blue eyes To turn his head and look at 
her would have been inconceivable folly With hands locked together, invisible 
among the press of bodies, they stared steadily m front of them, and instead of 
the eyes of the girl, the eyes of the aged prisoner gazed mournfully at Winston 
out of nests of hair 


2 


Winston picked his way up the lane through dappled light and shade, stepping 
out into pools of gold wherever the boughs parted Under the trees to the left of 
him the ground was misty with bluebells The air seemed to kiss one’s skm It 
was the second of May From somewhere deeper in the heart of the wood came 
the droning of ring-doves 

He was a bit early. There had been no difficulties about the journey, and the 
girl was so evidently experienced that he was less frightened than he would L 
normally have been Presumably she could be trusted to find a safe place In 
general you could not assume that you were much safer m the country than m 
London There were no telescreens, of course, but there was always the danger 
of concealed microphones by which your voice might be picked up and 
recognized; besides, it was not easy to make a journey by yourself without 
attracting attention. For distances of less than ioo kilometres it was not 
necessary to get your passport endorsed, but sometimes there were patrols 
hanging about the railway stations, who examined the papers of any Party 
member they found there and asked awkward questions However, no patrols 
had appeared, and on the walk from the station he had made sure by cautious 
backward glances that he was not being followed The tram was full of proles, 
in' holiday mood because of the summery weather. The wooden-seated 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 813 

carriage m which he travelled was filled to overflowing by a single enormous 
family, ranging from a toothless great-grandmother to a month-old baby, 
going out to spend an afternoon with ‘in-laws’ in the country, and, as they 
freely explained to Winston, to get hold of a little black-market butter 

The lane widened, and in a minute he came to the footpath she had told him 
of, a mere cattle-track which plunged between the bushes He had no watch, 
but it could not be fifteen yet The bluebells were so thick underfoot that it was 
impossible not to tread on them He knelt down and began picking some, 
partly to pass the time away, but also from a vague idea that he would like to 
have a bunch of flowers to offer to the girl when they met He had got together 
a big bunch and was smelling their faint sickly scent when a sound at his back 
froze him, the unmistakable crackle of a foot on twigs He went on picking 
bluebells It was the best thing to do It might be the girl, or he might have 
been followed after all A hand fell lightly on his shoulder 

He looked up It was the girl She shook her head, evidently as a warning 
that he must keep silent, then parted the bushes and quickly led the way along 
the narrow track into the wood Obviously she had been that way before, for 
she dodged the boggy bits as though by habit Winston followed, still clasping 
his bunch of flowers His first feeling was relief, but as he watched the strong 
slender body moving in front of him, with the scarlet sash that was just tight 
enough to bring out the curve of her hips, the sense of his own inferiority was 
heavy upon him Even now it seemed quite likely that when she turned round 
and looked at him she would draw back after all The sweetness of the air and 
the greenness of the leaves daunted him Already on the walk from the station 
the May sunshine had made him feel dirty and etiolated, a creature of indoors, 
with the sooty dust of London m the pores of his skm It occurred to him that 
till now she had probably never seen him m broad daylight m the open They 
came to the fallen tree that she had spoken of The girl hopped over and forced 
apart the bushes, m which there did not seem to be an opemng When Winston 
followed her, he found that they were in a natural clearing, a tiny grassy knoll 
surrounded by tall saplings that shut it in completely The girl stopped and 
turned 

‘Here we are,’ she said 

He was facmg her at several paces’ distance As yet he did not dare move 
nearer to her 

‘I didn’t want to say anything in the lane,’ she went on, ‘in case there’s a 
mike hidden there I don’t suppose there is, but there could be There’s always 
the chance of one of those swine recognizing your voice We’re all right here,’ 

He still had not the courage to approach her ‘We’re all right here’’ he 
repeated stupidly 

‘Yes. Look at the trees ’ They were small ashes, which at some tune had been 
cut down and had sprouted up again into a forest of poles, none of them thicker 
than one’s wrist. ‘There’s nothing big enough to hide a mike in Besides, I’ve 
been here before ’ 

They were only makmg conversation He had managed to move closer to her 
now She stood before him very upright, with a smile on her face that looked 



8 14 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

faintly ironical, as though she were wondering why he was so slow to act The 
bluebells had cascaded on to the ground They seemed to have fallen of their 
own accord He took her hand 

‘Would you believe,’ he said, ‘that till this moment I didn’t know what 
colour your eyes were?’ They were brown, he noted, a rather light shade of 
brown, with dark lashes ‘Now that you’ve seen what I’m really like, can you 
still bear to look at me?’ 

‘Yes, easily ’ 

‘I’m thirty-nine years old I’ve got a wife that I can’t get rid of I’ve got 
varicose vems I’ve got five false teeth ’ 

‘I couldn’t care less,’ said the girl 

The next moment, it was hard to say by whose act, she was m his arms At 
the beginning he had no feeling except sheer incredulity The youthful body 
was strained agamst his own, the mass of dark hair was against his face, and 
yes 1 actually she had turned her face up and he was kissing the wide red mouth 
She had clasped her arms about his neck, she was calling him darling, precious 
one, loved one He had pulled her down on to the ground, she was utterly 
unresisting, he could do what he liked with her But the truth was that he had 
no physical sensation, except that of mere contact All he felt was incredulity 
and pride He was glad that this was happening, but he had no physical desire 
It was too soon, her youth and prettmess had frightened him, he was too much 
used to living without women-he did not know the reason The girl picked 
herself up and pulled a bluebell out of her hair She sat against him, putting her 
arm round his waist 

‘Never mind, dear There’s no hurry We’ve got the whole afternoon. Isn’t 
this a splendid hideout? I found it when I got lost once on a community hike If 
anyone was coming you could hear them a hundred metres away * 

‘What is your name?’ said Winston 

‘Julia I know yours It’s Wmston-Winston Smith ’ 

‘How did you find that out?’ 

‘I expect I’m better at finding things out than you are, dear Tell me, what 
did you think of me before that day I gave you the note?’ 

He did not feel any temptation to tell lies to her It was even a sort of love- 
offering to start off by telling the worst. 

‘I hated the sight of you, 5 he said ‘ I wanted to rape you and then murder you 
afterwards Two weeks ago I thought seriously of smashing your head in with a 
cobblestone If you really want to know, I imagined that you had something to 
do with the Thought Police ’ 

The girl laughed delightedly, evidently taking this as a tribute to the 
excellence of her disguise 

‘Not the Thought Police 1 You didn’t honestly think that?’ 

‘Well, perhaps not exactly that. But from your general appearance-merely 
because you’re young and fresh and healthy, you understand- 1 thought that 
proMbly-’ 

* ‘You thought I was a good Party member Pure in word and deed Banners, 
processions, slogans, games, community hikes-all that stuff And you thought 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 8 

that if I had a quarter of a chance Pd denounce you as a thought-criminal and 
get you killed ofP’ 

‘Yes, something of that kind A great many young girls are like that, you 
know 5 

‘It’s this bloody thing that does it,’ she said, ripping off the scarlet sash of the 
Junior Anti-Sex League and flinging it on to a bough Then, as though 
touching her waist had reminded her of something, she felt m the pocket of her 
overalls and produced a small slab of chocolate She broke it in half and gave 
one of the pieces to Winston Even before he had taken it he knew by the smell 
that it was very unusual chocolate It was dark and shiny, and was wrapped in 
silver paper Chocolate normally was dull-brown crumbly stuff that tasted, as 
nearly as one could describe it, like the smoke of a rubbish fire But at some 
time or another he had tasted chocolate like the piece she had given him The 
first whiff of its scent had stirred up some memory which he could not pin 
down, but which was powerful and troubling 

‘Where did you get this stufP’ he said 

‘Black market,’ she said indifferently ‘Actually I am that sort of girl, to look 
at I’m good at games I was a troop-leader m the Spies I do voluntary work 
three evenings a week for the Junior Anti-Sex League Hours and hours I’ve 
spent pasting their bloody rot all over London I always carry one end of a 
banner in the processions I always look cheerful and I never shirk anything 
Always yell with the crowd, that’s what I say It’s the only way to be safe ’ 

The first fragment of chocolate had melted on Winston’s tongue The taste 
was delightful But there was still that memory moving round the edges of his 
consciousness, something strongly felt but not reducible to definite shape, like 
an object seen out of the corner of one’s eye He pushed it away from him, 
aware only that it was the memory of some action which he would have liked to 
undo but could not 

‘You are very young,’ he said ‘You are ten or fifteen years younger than I 
am What could you see to attract you m a man like me'*’ 

‘It was something m your face I thought I’d take a chance I’m good at 
spotting people who don’t belong As soon as I saw you I knew you were 
against them ’ 

Them, it appeared, meant the Party, and above all the Inner Party, about 
whom she talked with an open jeering hatred which made Winston feel uneasy, 
although he knew that they were safe here if they could be safe anywhere A 
thing that astonished him about her was the coarseness of her language Party 
members were supposed not to swear, and Winston himself very seldom did 
swear, aloud, at any rate Julia, however, seemed unable to mention the Party, 
and especially the Inner Party, without using the kind of words that you saw 
chalked up m dripping alley-ways He did not dislike it It was merely one 
symptom of her revolt agamst the Party and all its ways, and somehow it 
seemed natural and healthy, like the sneeze of a horse that smells bad hay 
They had left the clearing and were wandering again through the chequered 
shade, with their arms round each other’s waists whenever it was wide enough 
to walk two abreast- He noticed how much softer her waist seemed to feel now 



816 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

that the sash was gone They did not speak above a whisper Outside the 
clearing, Julia said, it was better to go quietly Presently they had reached the 
edge of the little wood She stopped him 

‘Don’t go out into the open There might be someone watching We’re all 
right if we keep behind the boughs ’ 

They were standing m the shade of hazel bushes The sunlight, filtering 
throu gh innumerable leaves, was still hot on their faces Winston looked out 
into the field beyond, and underwent a curious, slow shock of recognition He 
knew it by sight An old, close-bitten pasture, with a footpath wandering 
across it and a molehill here and there In the ragged hedge on the opposite side 
the boughs of the elm trees swayed just perceptibly m the breeze, and their 
leaves stirred faintly m dense masses like women’s hair Surely somewhere 
near by, but out of sight, there must be a stream with green pools where dace 
were swimming^ 

‘Isn’t there a stream somewhere near here^’ he whispered 
‘That’s right, there is a stream It’s at the edge of the next field, actually 
There are fish m it, great big ones You can watch them lying m the pools 
under the willow trees, waving their tails ’ 

‘It’s the Golden Country-almost,’ he murmured 
‘The Golden Country^’ 

‘It’s nothing, really A landscape I’ve seen sometimes in a dream ’ 

‘Look*’ whispered Julia 

A thrush had alighted on a bough not five metres away, almost at the level of 
their faces Perhaps it had not seen them It was m the sun, they m the shade It 
spread out its wings, fitted them carefully mto place again, ducked its head for 
a moment, as though making a sort of obeisance to the sun, and then began to 
pour forth a torrent of song In the afternoon hush the volume of sound was 
startling Winston and Julia clung together, fascinated. The music went on 
and on, minute after minute, with astonishing variations, never once repeating 
itself, almost as though the bird were deliberately showing off its virtuosity 
Sometimes it stopped for a few seconds, spread out and resettled its wings, 
then swelled its speckled breast and again burst mto song. Wmston watched it 
with a sort of vague reverence For whom, for what, was that bird singing? No 
mate, no rival was watching it What made it sit at the edge of the lonely wood 
and pour its music mto nothingness? He wondered whether after all there was 
a microphone hidden somewhere near He and Julia had only spoken m low 
whispers, and it would not pick up what they had said, but it would pick up the 
thrush. Perhaps at the other end of the instrument some small, beetle-like man 
was listening intently-listening to that. But by degrees the flood of music 
drove all speculations out of his mind. It was as though it were a kind of liquid 
stuff that poured all over him and got mixed up with the sunlight that filtered 
through the leaves. He stopped thinking and merely felt. The girl’s waist in the 
bend of his arm was soft and warm. He pulled her round so that they were 
breast to breast, her body seemed to melt mto his Wherever his hands moved 
tt was all as yielding as water Their mouths clung together, it was quite 
different from the hard kisses they had exchanged earlier When they moved 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 8ij 

their faces apart again both of them sighed deeply The bird took fright and 
fled with a clatter of wings 

Winston put his lips against her ear ‘Now/ he whispered 
‘Not here/ she whispered back ‘Come back to the hideout It’s safer ’ 
Quickly, with an occasional crackle of twigs, they threaded their way back to 
the clearing When they were once inside the ring of saplings she turned and 
faced him They were both breathing fast, but the smile had reappeared round 
the corners of her mouth She stood looking at him for an instant, then felt at 
the zipper of her overalls And, yes 1 it was almost as m his dream Almost as 
swiftly as he had imagined it, she had torn her clothes off, and when she flung 
them aside it was with that same magnificent gesture by which a whole 
civilization seemed to be annihilated Her body gleamed white in the sun But 
for a moment he did not look at her body, his eyes were anchored by the 
freckled face with its faint, bold smile He knelt down before her and took her 
hands in his 

‘Have you done this before?’ 

‘Of course Hundreds of times-well, scores of times anyway ’ 

‘With Party members?’ 

‘Yes, always with Party members ’ 

‘With members of the Inner Party?’ 

‘Not with those swine, no But there’s plenty that would if they got half a 
chance They’re not so holy as they make out ’ 

His heart leapt Scores of times she had done it he wished it had been 
hundreds-thousands Anything that hinted at corruption always filled him 
with a wild hope Who knew, perhaps the Party was rotten under the surface, 
its cult of strenuousness and self-denial simply a sham concealing iniquity If 
he could have infected the whole lot of them with leprosy or syphilis, how 
gladly he would have done so 1 Anything to rot, to weaken, to undermine 1 He 
pulled her down so that they were kneeling face to face 

‘Listen The more men you’ve had, the more I love you Do you understand 
that?’ 

‘Yes, perfectly ’ 

‘I hate purity, I hate goodness' I don’t want any virtue to exist anywhere I 
want everyone to be corrupt to the bones ’ 

‘Well then, I ought to suit you, dear I’m corrupt to the bones ’ 

‘You like doing this? I don’t mean simply me I mean the thing in itself?’ 

‘I adore it ’ 

That was above all what he wanted to hear Not merely the love of one 
person but the animal instinct, the simple undifferentiated desire that was the 
force that would tear the Party to pieces He pressed her down upon the grass, 
among the fallen bluebells. This time there was no difficulty. Presently the 
rising and falling of their breasts slowed to normal speed, and in a sort of 
pleasant helplessness they fell apart The sun seemed to have grown hotter 
They were both sleepy He reached out for the discarded overalls and pulled 
them partly over her Almost immediately they fell asleep and slept for about 
half an hour. 



818 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

Winston woke first He sat up and watched the freckled face, still peacefully 
asleep, pillowed on the palm of her hand Except for her mouth, you could not 
call her beautiful There was a line or two round the eyes, if you looked closely 
The short dark hair was extraordinarily thick and soft It occurred to him that 
he still did not know her surname or where she lived 

The young, strong body, now helpless m sleep, awoke in him a pitying, 
protectmg feeling But the mindless tenderness that he had felt under the hazel 
tree, while the thrush was singing, had not quite come back He pulled the 
overalls aside and studied her smooth white flank In the old days, he thought, 
a man looked at a girl’s body and saw that it was desirable, and that was the end 
of the story But you could not have pure love or pure lust nowadays No 
emotion was pure, because everything was mixed up with fear and hatred 
Their embrace had been a battle, the climax a victory It was a blow struck 
against the Party It was a political act 


3 


c We can come here once again,’ said Julia ‘It’s generally safe to use any hide- 
out twice But not for another month or two, of course ’ 

As soon as she woke up her demeanour had changed She became alert and 
business-like, put her clothes on, knotted the scarlet sash about her waist, and 
began arranging the details of the journey home It seemed natural to leave this 
to her She obviously had a practical cunning which Winston lacked, and she 
seemed also to have an exhaustive knowledge of the countryside round 
London, stored away from innumerable community hikes- The route she gave 
him was quite different from the one by which he had come, and brought him 
out at a different railway station ‘Never go home the same way as you went 
out,’ she said, as though enunciating an important general principle She 
would leave first, and Winston was to wait half an hour before following her 

She had named a place where they could meet after work, four evenings 
hence It was a street in one of the poorer quarters, where there was an open 
market which was generally crowded and noisy. She would be hanging about 
among the stalls, pretending to be m search of shoelaces or sewing-thread If 
she judged that the coast was clear she would blow her nose when he 
approached* otherwise he was to walk past her without recognition But with 
luck, m the middle of the crowd, it would be safe to talk for a quarter of an hour 
and arrange another meeting 

‘And now I must go,’ she said as soon as he had mastered his instructions, 
‘I’m due back at nineteen-thirty. I’ve got to put in two hours for the Junior 
Anti-Sex League, handing out leaflets, or something Isn’t it bloody > Give me 
a brush-down, would you? Have I got any twigs in my hair? Are you sure? 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 81 9 

Then good-bye, my love, good-bye 1 ’ 

She flung herself into his arms, kissed him almost violently, and a moment 
later pushed her way through the saplings and disappeared into the wood with 
very little noise Even now he had not found out her surname or her address 
However, it made no difference, for it was inconceivable that they could ever 
meet indoors or exchange any kind of written communication 

As it happened, they never went back to the clearing m the wood During the 
month of May there was only one further occasion on which they actually 
succeeded m making love That was m another hiding-place known to Julia, 
the belfry of a rmnous church m an almost-deserted stretch of country where 
an atomic bomb had fallen thirty years earlier It was a good hiding-place when 
once you got there, but the getting there was very dangerous For the rest they 
could meet only in the streets, in a different place every evening and never for 
more than half an hour at a time In the street it was usually possible to talk, 
after a fashion As they drifted down the crowded pavements, not quite abreast 
and never looking at one another, they carried on a curious, intermittent 
conversation which flicked on and off like the beams of a lighthouse, suddenly 
nipped into silence by the approach of a Party uniform or the proximity of a 
telescreen, then taken up again minutes later m the middle of a sentence, then 
abruptly cut short as they parted at the agreed spot, then continued almost 
without introduction on the following day Julia appeared to be quite used to 
this kind of conversation, which she called ‘talking by instalments’ She was 
also surprisingly adept at speaking without moving her lips Just once in 
almost a month of nightly meetings they managed to exchange a kiss They 
were passing in silence down a side-street (Julia would never speak when they 
were away from the main streets) when there was a deafening roar, the earth 
heaved, and the air darkened, and Winston found himself lying on his side, 
bruised and terrified A rocket bomb must have dropped quite near at hand 
Suddenly he became aware of Julia’s face a few centimetres from his own, 
deathly white, as white as chalk Even her lips were white She was dead 1 He 
clasped her against him and found that he was kissing a live warm face But 
there was some powdery stuff that got in the way of his lips Both of their faces 
were thickly coated with plaster 

There were evemngs when they reached their rendezvous and then had to 
walk past one another without a sign, because a patrol had just come round the 
comer or a helicopter was hovering overhead Even if it had been less 
dangerous, it would still have been difficult to find time to meet Winston’s 
working week was sixty hours, Julia’s was even longer, and their free days 
varied according to the pressure of work and did not often coincide Julia, m 
any case, seldom had an evening completely free. She spent an astonishing 
amount of time in attending lectures and demonstrations, distributing 
literature for the Junior Anti-Sex League, preparing banners for Hate Week, 
making collections for the savings campaign, and such-hke activities. It paid, 
she said, it was camouflage If you kept the small rules, you could break the big 
ones She even induced Winston to, mortgage yet another of his evemngs by 
enrolling himself for the part-time munition work which was done voluntarily 



820 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

by zealous Party members So, one evening every week, Winston spent four 
hours of paralysing boredom, screwing together small bits of metal which were 
probably parts of bomb fuses, m a draughty, ill-lit workshop where the 
knocking of hammers mingled drearily with the music of the telescreens 
When they met in the church tower the gaps in their fragmentary 
conversation were filled up It was a blazing afternoon The air in the little 
square chamber above the bells was hot and stagnant, and smelt 
overpowermgly of pigeon-dung They sat talking for hours on the dusty, twig- 
littered floor, one or other of them getting up from time to time to cast a glance 
through the arrowslits and make sure that no one was coming 
Julia was twenty-six years old She lived m a hostel with thirty other girls 
(‘Always m the stmk of women 1 How I hate women 1 ’ she said parenthetically), 
and she worked, as he had guessed, on the novel-writing machines m the 
Fiction Department She enjoyed her work, which consisted chiefly m running 
and servicing a powerful but tricky electric motor She was ‘not clever 5 , but 
was fond of using her hands and felt at home with machinery She could 
describe the whole process of composing a novel, from the general directive 
issued by the Planning Committee down to the final touching-up by the 
Rewrite Squad But she was not interested m the finished product She ‘didn’t 
much care for reading, 5 she said Books were just a commodity that had to be 
produced, like jam or bootlaces 

She had no memories of anything before the early ’sixties, and the only 
person she had ever known who talked frequently of the days before the 
Revolution was a grandfather who had disappeared when she was eight At 
school she had been captain of the hockey team and had won the gymnastics 
trophy two years running She had been a troop-leader in the Spies and a 
branch secretary in the Youth League before joining the Junior Anti-Sex 
League She had always borne an excellent character She had even (an 
infallible mark of good reputation) been picked out to work in Pornosec, the 
sub-section of the Fiction Department which turned out cheap pornography 
for distribution among the proles It was nicknamed Muck House by the 
people who worked m it, she remarked There she had remained for a year, 
helping to produce booklets m sealed packets with titles like Spanking Stories 
or One Night m a Girls’ School , to be bought furtively by proletarian youths 
who were under the impression that they were buying something illegal 
‘What are these books like?’ said Winston curiously 
‘Oh, ghastly rubbish They’re boring, really They only have six plots, but 
they swap them round a bit Of course I was only on the kaleidoscopes I was 
never in the Rewrite Squad I’m not literary, dear-not even enough for that ’ 
He learned with astonishment that all the workers in Pornosec, except the 
heads of the departments, were girls The theory was that men, whose sex 
instincts were less controllable then those of women, were m greater danger of 
being corrupted by the filth they handled 
*The$ don’t even like having married women there,* she added ‘Girls are 
always supposed to be so pure Here’s one who isn’t, anyway ’ 

She had had her first love-affair when she was sixteen, with a Party member 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 821 

of sixty who later committed suicide to avoid arrest ‘And a good job too/ said 
Julia, ‘otherwise they’d have had my name out of him when he confessed ’ 
Since then there had been various others Life as she saw it was quite simple 
You wanted a good time, ‘they’, meaning the Party, wanted to stop you having 
it, you broke the rules as best you could She seemed to think it just as natural 
that ‘they’ should want to rob you of your pleasures as that you should want to 
avoid being caught She hated the Party, and said so in the crudest words, but 
she made no general criticism of it Except where it touched upon her own life 
she had no interest in Party doctrine He noticed that she never used Newspeak 
words except the ones that had passed into everyday use She had never heard 
of the Brotherhood, and refused to believe m its existence Any kind of 
organized revolt against the Party, which was bound to be a failure, struck her 
as stupid The clever thing was to break the rules and stay alive all the same 
He wondered vaguely how many others like her there might be m the younger 
generation-people who had grown up in the world of the Revolution, knowing 
nothing else, accepting the Party as something unalterable, like the sky, not 
rebelling against its authority but simply evading it, as a rabbit dodges a dog 
They did not discuss the possibility of getting married It was too remote to 
be worth thinking about No imaginable committee would ever sanction such a 
marriage even if Katharine, Winston’s wife, could somehow have been got rid 
of It was hopeless even as a daydream 
‘What was she like, your wife?’ said Julia 

‘She was-do you know the Newspeak word goodthmkfuP Meamng naturally 
orthodox, incapable of thinking a bad thought?’ 

‘No, I didn’t know the word, but I know the kind of person, right enough ’ 
He began telling her the story of his married life, but curiously enough she 
appeared to know the essential parts of it already She described to him, almost 
as though she had seen or felt it, the stiffening of Katharine’s body as soon as 
he touched her, the way m which she still seemed to be pushing him from her 
with all her strength, even when her arms were clasped tightly round him 
With Julia he felt no difficulty m talking about such things Katharine, in any 
case, had long ceased to be a painful memory and became merely a distasteful 
one 

‘I could have stood it if it hadn’t been for one thing,’ he said He told her 
about the frigid little ceremony that Katharine had forced him to go through 
on the same night every week ‘She hated it, but nothing would make her stop 
doing it She used to call lt-but you’ll never guess ’ 

‘Our duty to the Party,’ said Julia promptly 
‘How did you know that?’ 

‘I’ve been at school too, dear Sex talks once a month for the over-sixteens 
And in the Youth Movement They mb it into you for years I dare say it 
works in a lot of cases* But of course you can never tell, people are such 
hypocrites ’ 

She began to enlarge upon the subject With Julia, everything came back to 
her own sexuality As soon as this was touched upon in any way she was 
capable of great acuteness Unlike Winston, she had grasped the inner 



822 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

meaning of the Party’s sexual puntamsm It was not merely that the sex 
instinct created a world of its own which was outside the Party’s control and 
which therefore had to be destroyed if possible What was more important was 
that sexual privation induced hysteria, which was desirable because it could be 
transformed into war-fever and leader-worship The way she put it was 
‘When you make love you’re using up energy, and afterwards you feel happy 
and don’t give a damn for anything They can’t bear you to feel like that They 
want you to be bursting with energy all the time All this marching up and 
down and cheering and waving flags is simply sex gone sour If you’re happy 
mside yourself, why should you get excited about Big Brother and the Three- 
Year Plans and the Two Minutes Hate and all the rest of their bloody rot’’ 
That was very true, he thought There was a direct intimate connexion 
between chastity and political orthodoxy For how could the fear, the hatred, 
and the lunatic credulity which the Party needed in its members be kept at the 
right pitch, except by bottling down some powerful instinct and using it as a 
driving forced The sex impulse was dangerous to the Party, and the Party had 
turned it to account They had played a similar trick with the instinct of 
parenthood The family could not actually be abolished, and, indeed, people 
were encouraged to be fond of their children in almost the old-fashioned way 
The children, on the other hand, were systematically turned against their 
parents and taught to spy on them and report their deviations The family had 
become in effect an extension of the Thought Police It was a device by means 
of which everyone could be surrounded night and day by informers who knew 
him intimately 

Abruptly his mind went back to Katharine Katharine would un- 
questionably have denounced him to the Thought Police if she had not 
happened to be too stupid to detect the unorthodoxy of his opinions But what 
really recalled her to him at this moment was the stifling heat of the afternoon, 
which had brought the sweat out on his forehead He began telling Julia of 
something that had happened, or rather had failed to happen, on another 
sweltering summer afternoon, eleven years ago 
It was three or four months after they were married They had lost their way 
on a community hike somewhere m Kent They had only lagged behind the 
others for a couple of minutes, but they took a wrong turning, and presently 
found themselves pulled up short by the edge of an old chalk quarry. It was a 
sheer drop of ten or twenty metres, with boulders at the bottom There was 
nobody of whotn they could ask the way As soon as she realized that they were 
lost Katharine became very uneasy To be away from the noisy mob of hikers 
even for a moment gave her a feeling of wrong-domg She wanted to hurry 
back by the way they had come and start searching m the other direction But 
at this moment Winston noticed some tufts of loosestrife growing m the cracks 
of the cliff beneath them. One tuft was of two colours, magenta and brick-red, 
apparently growing on the same root He had never seen anything of the kind 
before, and he called to Katharine to come and look at it 
‘Look, Katharine 1 Look at those flowers That clump down near the bottom 
Do you, see they’re two different colours’’ 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 823 

She had already turned to go, but she did rather fretfully come back for a 
moment She even leaned out over the cliff face to see where he was pointmg 
He was standing a little behind her, and he put his hand on her waist to steady 
her At this moment it suddenly occurred to him how completely alone they 
were There was not a human creature anywhere, not a leaf stirring, not even a 
bird awake In a place like this the danger that there would be a hidden 
microphone was very small, and even if there was a microphone it would only 
pick up sounds It was the hottest sleepiest hour of the afternoon The sun 
blazed down upon them, the sweat tickled his face And the thought struck 
him 

‘Why didn’t you give her a good shove?’ said Julia ‘I would have ’ 

‘Yes, dear, you would have I would, if I’d been the same person then as I am 
now Or perhaps I would- I’m not certain ’ 

‘Are you sorry you didn’t?’ 

‘Yes On the whole I’m sorry I didn’t ’ 

They were sitting side by side on the dusty floor He pulled her closer 
against him Her head rested on his shoulder, the pleasant smell of her hair 
conquering the pigeon dung She was very young, he thought, she still 
expected something from life, she did not understand that to push an 
inconvenient person over a cliff solves nothing 

‘Actually it would have made no difference,’ he said 
‘Then why are you sorry you didn’t do it?’ 

‘Only because I prefer a positive to a negative In this game that we’re 
playing, we can’t wm Some kinds of failure are better than other kinds, that’s 
all’ 

He felt her shoulders give a wriggle of dissent She always contradicted him 
when he said anything of this kind She would not accept it as a law of nature 
that the individual is always defeated In a way she realized that she herself was 
doomed, that sooner or later the Thought Police would catch her and kill her, 
but with another part of her mind she believed that it was somehow possible to 
construct a secret world m which you could live as you chose All you needed 
was luck and cunning and boldness She did not understand that there was no 
such thing as happiness, that the only victory lay m the far future, long after 
you were dead, that from the moment of declaring war on the Party it was 
better to think of yourself as a corpse 
‘We are the dead,’ he said 
‘We’re not dead yet,’ said Julia prosaically 

‘Not physically Six months, a year-five years, conceivably I am afraid of 
death You are young, so presumably you’re more afraid of it than I am 
Obviously we shall put it off as long as we can But it makes very little 
difference So long as human beings stay human, death and life are the same 
thing ’ 

‘Oh, rubbish 1 Which would you sooner sleep with, me or a skeleton? Don’t 
you enjoy being alive? Don’t you like feeling This is me, this is my hand, this 
is my leg. I’m real, I’m solid, I’m alive 1 Don’t you hke this> 7 

She twisted herself round and pressed her bosom against him* He could feel 



824 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

her breasts, ripe yet firm, through her overalls Her body seemed to be pouring 
some of its youth and vigour into his 
‘Yes, I like that,’ he said 

‘Then stop talking about dying And now listen, dear, we’ve got to fix up 
about the next time we meet We may as well go back to the place in the wood 
We’ve given it a good long rest But you must get there by a different way this 
time I’ve got it all planned out You take the tram-but look. I’ll draw it out for 
you ’ 

And m her practical way she scraped together a small square of dust, and 
with a twig from a pigeon’s nest began drawing a map on the floor 


4 


Winston looked round the shabby little room above Mr Charrmgton’s shop 
Beside the window the enormous bed was made up, with ragged blankets and a 
coverless bolster The old-fashioned clock with the twelve-hour face was 
ticking away on the mantelpiece In the corner, on the gateleg table, the glass 
paperweight which he had bought on his last visit gleamed softly out of the 
half-darkness 

In the fender was a battered tin oilstove, a saucepan, and two cups, provided 
by Mr Charnngton Winston lit the burner and set a pan of water to boil He 
had brought an envelope full of Victory Coffee and some saccharine tablets 
The clock’s hands said seven-twenty it was nineteen-twenty really She was 
coming at nineteen-thirty 

Folly, folly, his heart kept saying' conscious, gratuitous, suicidal folly Of all 
the crimes that a Party member could commit, this one was the least possible to 
conceal Actually the idea had first floated into his head m the form of a vision, 
of the glass paperweight mirrored by the surface of the gateleg table As he had 
foreseen, Mr Charnngton had made no difficulty about letting the room He 
was obviously glad of the few dollars that it would bring him Nor did he seem 
shocked or become offensively knowing when it was made clear that Winston 
wanted the room for the purpose of a love-affair Instead he looked into the 
middle distance and spoke in generalities, with so delicate an air as to give 
the impression that he had become partly invisible Pnvacy, he said, was a very 
valuable thing. Everyone wanted a place where they could be alone 
occasionally And when they had such a place, it was only common courtesy in 
anyone else who knew of it to keep his knowledge to himself. He even, seeming 
almost to fade out of existence as he did so, added that there were two entries to 
the house, one of them through the back yard, which gave on an alley 

Under the window somebody was singing Winston peeped out, secure m 
the protection of the muslin curtain The June sun was still high in the sky, and 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 82s 

m the sun-filled court below, a monstrous woman, solid as a Norman pillar, 
with brawny red forearms and a sacking apron strapped about her middle, was 
stumping to and fro between a washtub and a clothes line, pegging out a series 
of square white things which Winston recognized as babies’ diapers 
Whenever her mouth was not corked with clothes pegs she was singing in a 
powerful contralto 

It was only an ’opeless fancy, 

It passed like an Ipnl dye, 

But a look an’ a word an’ the- dreams they stirred 1 
They ’ave stolen my ’eart awye 1 


The tune had been haunting London for weeks past It was one of countless 
similar songs published for the benefit of the proles by a sub-section of the 
Music Department The words of these songs were composed without any 
human intervention whatever on an instrument known as a versificator But 
the woman sang so tunefully as to turn the dreadful rubbish into an almost 
pleasant sound He could hear the woman singing and the scrape of her shoes 
on the flagstones, and the cries of the children in the street, and somewhere in 
the far distance a famt roar of traffic, and yet the room seemed curiously silent, 
thanks to the absence of a telescreen 

Folly, folly, folly 1 he thought again It was inconceivable that they could 
frequent this place for more than a few weeks without being caught But the 
temptation of having a hiding-place that was truly their own, indoors and near 
at hand, had been too much for both of them For some time after their visit to 
the church belfry it had been impossible to arrange meetings Working hours 
had been drastically increased in anticipation of Hate Week It was more than a 
month distant, but the enormous, complex preparations that it entailed were 
throwing extra work on to everybody Finally both of them managed to secure 
a free afternoon on the same day They had agreed to go back to the clearing m 
the wood On the evemng beforehand they met briefly in the street As usual, 
Winston hardly looked at Julia as they drifted towards one another m the 
crowd, but from the short glance he gave her it seemed to him that she was 
paler than usual. 

‘It’s all off,’ she murmured as soon as she judged it safe to speak ‘To- 
morrow, I mean ’ 

‘What?’ 

‘Tomorrow afternoon I can’t come ’ 

‘Why not>’ 

‘Oh, the usual reason It’s started early this time ’ 

For a moment he was violently angry During the month that he had known 
her the nature of his desire for her had changed. At the beginning there had 
been little true sensuality in it. Their first love-making had been simply an act 
of the will But after the second time it was different The smell of her hair, the 
taste of her mouth, the feelmg of her skm seemed to have got inside him, or 
into the air all round him. She had become a physical necessity, something that 
he not only wanted butfeltrthat he had a right to When she said that she could 



826 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

not come, he had the feeling that she was cheating him But just at this moment 
the crowd pressed them together and their hands accidentally met She gave 
the tips of his fingers a quick squeeze that seemed to invite not desire but 
affection It struck him that when one lived with a woman this particular 
disappointment must be a normal, recurring event, and a deep tenderness, 
such as he had not felt for her before, suddenly took hold of him He wished 
that they were a married couple of ten years’ standing He wished that he were 
walking through the streets with her just as they were doing now but openly 
and without fear, talking of trivialities and buying odds and ends for the 
household He wished above all that they had some place where they could be 
alone together without feeling the obligation to make love every time they met 
It was not actually at that moment, but at some time on the following day, that 
the idea of renting Mr Charrington’s room had occurred to him When he 
suggested it to Julia she had agreed with unexpected readiness Both of them 
knew that it was lunacy It was as though they were intentionally stepping 
nearer to their graves As he sat waiting on the edge of the bed he thought again 
of the cellars of the Ministry of Love It was curious how that predestined 
horror moved m and out of one’s consciousness There it lay, fixed in future 
times, preceding death as surely as 99 precedes 100 One could not avoid it, but 
one could perhaps postpone it and yet instead, every now and again, by a 
conscious, wilful act, one chose to shorten the interval before it happened 
At this moment there was a quick step on the stairs Julia burst into the 
room She was carrying a tool-bag of coarse brown canvas, such as he had 
sometimes seen her carrying to and fro at the Ministry He started forward to 
take her in his arms, but she disengaged herself rather hurriedly, partly 
because she was still holding the tool-bag 
‘Half a second,’ she said ‘Just let me show you what I’ve brought Did you 
bring some of that filthy Victory Coffee? I thought you would You can chuck 
it away again, because we shan’t be needing it Look here,’ 

She fell on her knees, threw open the bag, and tumbled out some spanners 
and a screwdriver that filled the top part of it Underneath were a number of 
neat paper packets The first packet that she passed to Winston had a strange 
and yet vaguely familiar feeling. It was filled with some kind of heavy, sand- 
like stuff which yielded wherever you touched it 
‘It isn’t sugar?’ he said. 

‘Real sugar Not saccharine, sugar And here’s a loaf of bread-proper white 
bread, not our bloody stuff-and a little pot of jam And here’s a tin of milk-but 
look 1 This is the one I’m really proud of, I had to wrap a bit of sacking round it, 
because-’ 

But she did not need to tell him why she had wrapped it up The smell was 
already filling the room, a rich hot smell which seemed like an emanation from 
his early childhood, but which one did occasionally meet with even now, 
blowing down a passage-way before a door slammed, or diffusing itself 
mysteriously m a crowded street, sniffed for an instant and then lost again 
‘It’s coffee,’ he murmured, ‘real coffee ’ 

‘It’s Inner Party coffee There’s a whole kilo here,’ she said 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 82 7 

‘How did you manage to get hold of all these things?’ 

‘It’s all Inner Party stuff There’s nothing those swine don’t have, nothing 
But of course waiters and servants and people pinch things, and-look, I got a 
little packet of tea as well ’ 

Winston had squatted down beside her He tore open a corner of the packet 

‘It’s real tea Not blackberry leaves ’ 

‘There’s been a lot of tea about lately They’ve captured India, or 
something,’ she said vaguely ‘But listen, dear I want you to turn your back on 
me for three minutes Go and sit on the other side of the bed Don’t go too near 
the wmdow And don’t turn round till I tell you ’ 

Winston gazed abstractedly through the muslin curtain Down m the yard 
the red-armed woman was still marching to and fro between the washtub and 
the line She took two more pegs out of her mouth and sang with deep feeling 

They sye that time ’eals all things. 

They sye you can always forget, 

But the smiles an’ the tears acrorss the years 
They twist my ’eart-strmgs yet 1 

She knew the whole drivelling song by heart, it seemed Her voice floated 
upward with the sweet summer air, very tuneful, charged with a sort of happy 
melancholy One had the feeling that she would have been perfectly content, if 
the June evemng had been endless and the supply of clothes inexhaustible, to 
remain there for a thousand years, pegging out diapers and singing rubbish It 
struck him as a curious fact that he had never heard a member of the Party 
singing alone and spontaneously It would even have seemed slightly 
unorthodox, a dangerous eccentricity, like talking to oneself Perhaps it was 
only when people were somewhere near the starvation level that they had 
anything to smg about 

‘You can turn round now,’ said Julia 

He turned round, and for a second almost failed to recognize her What he 
had actually expected was to see her naked But she was not naked The 
transformation that had happened was much more surprising than that She 
had painted her face 

She must have slipped into some shop in the proletarian quarters and 
bought herself a complete set of make-up materials Her lips were deeply 
reddened, her cheeks rouged, her nose powdered, there was even a touch of 
something under the eyes to make them brighter It was not very skilfully 
done, but Winston’s standards m such matters were not high He had never 
before seen or imagined a woman of the Party with cosmetics on her face The 
improvement in her appearance was startling With just a few dabs of colour m 
the right places she had become not only very much prettier, but, above all, far 
more feminine Her short hair and boyish overalls merely added to the effect 
As he took her in his arms a wave of synthetic violets flooded his nostrils He 
remembered the half-darkness of a basement kitchen, and a woman’s 
cavernous mouth It was the very same scent that she had used; but at the 
moment it did not seem to matter 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 


828 

‘Scent too 1 5 he said 

‘Yes, dear, scent too And do you know what I’m going to do next? I’m going 
to get hold of a real woman’s frock from somewhere and wear it instead of these 
bloody trousers I’ll wear silk stockings and high-heeled shoes 1 In this room 
I’m going to be a woman, not a Party comrade ’ 

They flung their clothes off and climbed into the huge mahogany bed It was 
the first time that he had stripped himself naked in her presence Until now he 
had been too much ashamed of his pale and meagre body, with the varicose 
veins standing out on his calves and the discoloured patch over his ankle 
There were no sheets, but the blanket they lay on was threadbare and smooth, 
and the size and springiness of the bed astonished both of them ‘It’s sure to be 
full of bugs, but who cares?’ said Julia One never saw a double bed nowadays, 
except m the homes of the proles Winston had occasionally slept m one in his 
boyhood Julia had never been in one before, so far as she could remember 

Presently they fell asleep for a little while When Winston woke up the hands 
of the clock had crept round to nearly nine He did not stir, because Julia was 
sleeping with her head in the crook of his arm Most of her make-up had 
transferred itself to his own face or the bolster, but a light stain of rouge still 
brought out the beauty of her cheekbone A yellow ray from the sinking sun 
fell across the foot of the bed and lighted up the fireplace, where the water in 
the pan was boiling fast Down m the yard the woman had stopped singing, but 
the faint shouts of children floated m from the street He wondered vaguely 
whether m the abolished past it had been a normal experience to he in bed like 
this, in the cool of a summer evening, a man and a woman with no clothes on, 
making love when they chose, talking of what they chose, not feeling any 
compulsion to get up, simply lying there and listening to peaceful sounds 
outside Surely there could never have been a time when that seemed ordinary? 
Julia woke up, rubbed her eyes, and raised herself on her elbow to look at the 
oilstove 

‘Half that water’s boiled away,’ she said ‘I’ll get up and make some coffee m 
another moment We’ve got an hour What time do they cut the lights off at 
your flats?’ 

‘Twenty-three thirty ’ 

‘It’s twenty-three at the hostel But you have to get m earlier than that, 
because -Hi 1 Get out, you filthy brute’’ 

She suddenly twisted herself over m the bed, seized a shoe from the floor, 
and sent it hurtling into the comer with a boyish )erk of her arm, exactly as he 
had seen her fling the dictionary at Goldstein, that morning during the Two 
Minutes Hate 

‘What was it?’ he said in surprise 

‘A rat I saw him stick his beastly nose out of the wainscoting There’s a hole 
down there, I gave him a good fright, anyway ’ 

‘Rats!’ murmured Winston ‘In this room 1 ’ 

'’They’re all over the place,’ said Julia indifferently as she lay down again 
‘We’ve even got them in the kitchen at the hostel Some parts of London are 
swarming with them Did you know they attack children? Yes, they do In 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 829 

some of these streets a woman daren’t leave a baby alone for two minutes It’s 
the great huge brown ones that do it And the nasty thing is that the brutes 
always-’ 

‘Don’t go on r> said Winston, with his eyes tightly shut 
‘Dearest 1 You’ve gone quite pale What’s the matter? Do they make you 
feel sick?’ 

‘Of all horrors m the world-a rat 1 ’ 

She pressed herself against him and wound her limbs round him, as though 
to reassure him with the warmth of her body He did not reopen his eyes 
immediately For several moments he had had the feeling of being back in a 
nightmare which had recurred from time to time throughout his life It was 
always very much the same He was standing m front of a wall of darkness, and 
on the other side of it there was something unendurable, some thin g too 
dreadful to be faced In the dream his deepest feeling was always one of self- 
deception, because he did in fact know what was behind the wall of darkness 
With a deadly effort, like wrenching a piece out of his own brain, he could even 
have dragged the thing into the open He always woke up without discovering 
what it was but somehow it was connected with what Julia had been saying 
when he cut her short 

‘I’m sorry,’ he said, ‘it’s nothing, I don’t like rats, that’s all ’ 

‘Don’t worry, dear, we’re not going to have the filthy brutes m here I’ll stuff 
the hole with a bit of sacking before we go And next time we come here I’ll 
bring some plaster and bung it up properly ’ 

Already the black instant of panic was half-forgotten Feeling slightly 
ashamed of himself, he sat up agamst the bedhead Julia got out of bed, pulled 
on her overalls, and made the coffee The smell that rose from the saucepan 
was so powerful and exciting that they shut the window lest anybody outside 
should notice it and become inquisitive What was even better than the taste of 
the coffee was the silky texture given to it by the sugar, a thing Wmston had 
almost forgotten after years of saccharine With one hand m her pocket and a 
piece of bread and jam m the other, Julia wandered about the room, glancing 
indifferently at the bookcase, pointing out the best way of repairing the gateleg 
table, plumping herself down in the ragged armchair to see if it was 
comfortable, and examining the absurd twelve-hour plock with a sort of 
tolerant amusement She brought the glass paperweight over to the bed to have 
a look at it m a better light He took it out of her hand, fascinated, as always, by 
the soft, rainwatery appearance of the glass 
‘What is it, do you think?’ said Julia 

‘I don’t think it’s anythmg-I mean, I don’t think it was ever put to any use 
That’s what I like about it It’s a little chunk of history that they’ve forgotten 
to alter It’s a message from a hundred years ago, if one knew how to read it ’ 
‘And that picture over there’-she nodded at the engraving on the opposite 
wall- ‘would that be a hundred years old?’ 

‘More Two hundred, I dare say One can’t tell It’s impossible to discover 
the age of anything nowadays ’ 

She went over to look at it ‘Here’s where that brute stuck his nose out,’ she 



830 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

said, kicking the wainscoting immediately below the picture ‘What is this 
placed I’ve seen it before somewhere ’ 

‘It’s a church, or at least it used to be St Clement Danes its name was 1 The 
fragment of rhyme that Mr Charrmgton had taught him came back into his 
head, and he added half-nostalgically 4 “Oranges and lemons, say the bells of 
St ClementV” 5 

To his astonishment she capped the line 

‘You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin’s, 

When will you pay me J say the bells of Old Bailey-’ 

‘I can’t remember how it goes on after that But anyway I remember it ends 
up, “Here comes a candle to light you to bed, here comes a chopper to chop off 
your head f ” ’ 

It was like the two halves of a countersign But there must be another line 
after ‘the bells of Old Bailey’ Perhaps it could be dug out of Mr Charrmgton’s 
memory, if he were suitably prompted 

‘Who taught you that^’ he said 

‘My grandfather He used to say it to me when I was a little girl He was 
vaporized when I was eight-at any rate, he disappeared I wonder what a 
lemon was,’ she added mconsequently ‘I’ve seen oranges They’re a kind of 
round yellow fruit with a thick skm ’ 

‘I can remember lemons,’ said Winston ‘They were quite common m the 
’fifties They were so sour that it set your teeth on edge even to smell them ’ 

‘I bet that picture’s got bugs behind it,’ said Julia ‘I’ll take it down and give 
it a good clean some day I suppose it’s almost time we were leaving I must 
start washing this paint off What a bore* I’ll get the lipstick off your face 
afterwards ’ 

Wmston did not get up for a few minutes more The room was darkening 
He turned over towards the light and lay gazing into the glass paperweight 
The inexhaustibly interesting thing was not the fragment of coral but the 
interior of the glass itself There was such a depth of it, and yet it was almost as 
transparent as air It was as though the surface of the glass had been the arch of 
the sky, enclosing a tiny world with its atmosphere complete He had the 
feeling that he could get inside it, and that in fact he was inside it, along with 
the mahogany bed and the gateleg table, and the clock and the steel engraving 
and the paperweight itself The paperweight was the room he was m, and the 
coral was Julia’s life and his own, fixed in a sort of eternity at the heart of the 
crystal 



5 


Syme had vanished A morning came, and he was missing from work a few 
thoughtless people commented on his absence On the next day nobody 
mentioned him On the third day Winston went into the vestibule of the 
Records Department to look at the notice-board One of the notices carried a 
printed list of the members of the Chess Committee, of whom Syme had been 
one It looked almost exactly as it had looked before-nothing hadheen crossed 
out-but it was one name shorter It was enough Syme had ceased to exist he 
had never existed 

The weather was baking hot In the labyrinthine Ministry the windowless, 
air-conditioned rooms kept their normal temperature, but outside the 
pavements scorched one’s feet and the stench of the Tubes at the rush hours 
was a horror The preparations for Hate Week were in full swing, and the staffs 
of all the Ministries were working overtime Processions, meetings, military 
parades, lectures, waxwork displays, film shows, telescreen programmes all 
had to be organized, stands had to be erected, effigies built, slogans coined, 
songs written, rumours circulated, photographs faked Julia’s unit m the 
Fiction Department had been taken off the production of novels and was 
rushing out a series of atrocity pamphlets Winston, m addition to his regular 
work, spent long periods every day m gomg through back files of The Times 
and altering and embellishing news items which were to be quoted in speeches 
Late at night, when crowds of rowdy proles roamed the streets, the town had a 
curiously febrile air The rocket bombs crashed oftener than ever, and 
sometimes m the far distance there were enormous explosions which no one 
could explain and about which there were wild rumours 

The new tune which was to be the theme-song of Hate Week (the Hate 
Song, it was called) had already been composed and was being endlessly 
plugged on the telescreens It had a savage, barking rhythm which could not 
exactly be called music, but resembled the beating of a drum Roared out by 
hundreds of voices to the tramp of marching feet, it was terrifying The proles 
had taken a fancy to it, and in the midnight streets it competed with the still- 
popular ‘It was only a hopeless fancy’. The Parsons children played it at all 
hours of the mght and day, unbearably, on a comb and a piece of toilet paper 
Winston’s evenings were fuller than ever Squads of volunteers, organized by 
Parsons, were preparing the street for Hate Week, stitching banners, painting 
posters, erecting flagstaffs on the roofs, and perilously slinging wires across the 
street for the reception of streamers Parsons boasted that Victory Mansions 



8 32 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

alone would display four hundred metres of bunting He was m his native 
element and as happy as a lark The heat and the manual work had even given 
him a pretext for reverting to shorts and an open shirt in the evenings He was 
everywhere at once, pushing, pulling, sawing, hammering, improvising, 
jollying everyone along with comradely exhortations and giving out from 
every fold of his body what seemed an inexhaustible supply of acrid-smelling 
sweat 

A new poster had suddenly appeared all over London It had no caption, and 
represented simply the monstrous figure of a Eurasian soldier, three or four 
metres high, striding forward with expressionless Mongolian face and 
enormous boots, a sub-machine gun pointed from his hip From whatever 
angle you looked at the poster, the muzzle of the gun, magnified by the 
foreshortening, seemed to be pointed straight at you The thing had been 
plastered on every blank space on every wall, even outnumbering the portraits 
of Big Brother The proles, normally apathetic about the war, were being 
lashed into one of their periodical frenzies of patriotism As though to 
harmonize with the general mood, the rocket bombs had been killing larger 
numbers of people than usual One fell on a crowded film theatre m Stepney, 
burying several hundred victims among the rums The whole population of 
the neighbourhood turned out for a long, trailing funeral which went on for 
hours and was m effect an indignation meeting Another bomb fell on a piece of 
waste ground which was used as a playground, and several dozen children 
were blown to pieces There were further angry demonstrations, Goldstem 
was burned in effigy, hundreds of copies of the poster of the Eurasian soldier 
were torn down and added to the flames, and a number of shops were looted m 
the turmoil, then a rumour flew round that spies were directing the rocket 
bombs by means of wireless waves, and an old couple who were suspected of 
being of foreign extraction had their house set on fire and perished of 
suffocation 

In the room over Mr Charrington’s shop, when they could get there, Julia 
and Winston lay side by side on a stripped bed under the open window, naked 
for the sake of coolness The rat had never come back, but the bugs had 
multiplied hideously m the heat It did not seem to matter Dirty or clean, the 
room was paradise As soon as they arrived they would sprinkle everything 
with pepper bought on the black market, tear off their clothes, and make love 
with sweating bodies, then fall asleep and wake to find that the bugs had rallied 
and were massing for the counter-attack 

Four, five, six-seven times they met during the month of June Winston had 
dropped his habit of drinking gm at all hours He seemed to have lost the need 
for it He had grown fatter, his varicose ulcer had subsided, leavmg only a 
brown stain on the skm above his ankle, his fits of coughing in the early 
Morning had stopped The process of life had ceased to be intolerable, he had 
nO longer afty impulse to make faces at the telescreen or shout curses at the top 
ofhis voice. Now that they had a secure hiding-place, almost a home, it did not 
even seem & hardship that they could only meet infrequently and for a couple 
ofhours at a time. What mattered was that the room over the junk-shop should 



Nineteen Eighty -Four 833 

exist To know that it was there, inviolate, was almost the same as being m it 
The room was a world, a pocket of the past where extinct animals could walk 
Mr Charnngton, thought Winston, was another extinct animal He usually 
stopped to talk with Mr Charnngton for a few minutes on his way upstairs 
The old man seemed seldom or never to go out of doors, and on the other hand 
to have almost no customers He led a ghostlike existence between the tiny, 
dark shop, and an even timer back kitchen where he prepared his meals and 
which contained, among other things, an unbelievably ancient gramophone 
with an enormous horn He seemed glad of the opportunity to talk Wandering 
about among his worthless stock, with his long nose and thick spectacles and 
his bowed shoulders m the velvet jacket, he had always vaguely the air of being 
a collector rather than a tradesman With a sort of faded enthusiasm he would 
finger this scrap of rubbish or that-a chma bottle-stopper, the painted lid of a 
broken snuffbox, a pinchbeck locket containing a strand of some long-dead 
baby’s hair-never asking that Winston should buy it, merely that he should 
admire it To talk to him was like listening to the tinkling of a worn-out 
musical-box He had dragged out from the corners of his memory some more 
fragments of forgotten rhymes There was one about four and twenty 
blackbirds, and another about a cow with a crumpled horn, and another about 
the death of poor Cock Robin ‘It just occurred to me you might be interested,’ 
he would say with a deprecating little laugh whenever he produced a new 
fragment But he could never recall more than a few 7 lines of any one rhyme 

Both of them knew-m a way, it was never out of their mmds-that what was 
now happening could not last long There were times when the fact of 
impending death seemed as palpable as the bed they lay on, and they would 
cling together with a sort of despairing sensuality, like a damned soul grasping 
at his last morsel of pleasure when the clock is within five minutes of striking 
But there were also times when they had the illusion not only of safety but of 
permanence So long as they were actually in this room, they both felt, no harm 
could come to them Getting there was difficult and dangerous, but the room 
itself was sanctuary It was as when Winston had gazed into the heart of the 
paperweight, with the feeling that it would be possible to get inside that glassy 
world, and that once inside it time could be arrested Often they gave 
themselves up to daydreams of escape, Their luck would hold indefinitely, and 
they would carry on their intrigue, just like this, for the remainder of their 
natural lives Or Katharine would die, and by subtle manceuvrmgs Winston 
and Julia would succeed in getting married Or they would commit suicide 
together Or they would disappear, alter themselves out of recognition, learn 
to speak with proletarian accents, get jobs m a factory and live out their lives 
undetected in a back- street It was all nonsense, as they both knew In reality 
there was no escape Even the one plan that was practicable, suicide, they had 
no intention of carrying out To hang on from day to day and from week to 
week, spinning out a present that had no future, seemed an unconquerable 
instinct, just as one’s lungs will always draw the next breath so long as there is 
air available 

Sometimes, too, they talked of engagingm active rebellion against the Party, 



8 34 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

but with no notion of how to take the first step Even if the fabulous 
Brotherhood was a reality, there still remained the difficulty of finding one’s 
way mto it He told her of the strange intimacy that existed, or seemed to exist, 
between himself and O’Brien, and of the impulse he sometimes felt, simply to 
walk into O’Brien’s presence, announce that he was the enemy of the Party, 
and demand his help Curiously enough, this did not strike her as an 
impossibly rash thing to do She was used to judging people by their faces, and 
it seemed natural to her that Winston should believe O’Brien to be trustworthy 
on the strength of a single flash of the eyes Moreover she took it for granted 
that everyone, or nearly everyone, secretly hated the Party and would break 
the rules if he thought it safe to do so But she refused to believe that 
widespread, organized opposition existed or could exist The tales about 
Goldstein and his underground army, she said, were simply a lot of rubbish 
which the Party had invented for its own purposes and which you had to 
pretend to believe m Times beyond number, at Party rallies and spontaneous 
demonstrations, she had shouted at the top of her voice for the execution of 
people whose names she had never heard and in whose supposed crimes she 
had not the faintest belief When public trials were happening she had taken 
her place in the detachments from the Youth League who surrounded the 
courts from morning to night, chanting at intervals ‘Death to the traitors 1 ’ 
During the Two Minutes Hate she always excelled all others in shouting 
insults at Goldstein Yet she had only the dimmest idea of who Goldstein was 
and what doctrines he was supposed to represent She had grown up since the 
Revolution and was too young to remember the ideological battles of the 
’fifties and ’sixties Such a thing as an independent political movement was 
outside her imagination and in any case the Party was invincible It would 
always exist, and it would always be the same You could only rebel against it 
by secret disobedience or, at most, by isolated acts of violence such as killing 
somebody or blowing something up 

In some ways she was far more acute than Winston, and far less susceptible 
to Party propaganda Once when he happened m some connexion to mention 
the war against Eurasia, she startled him by saying casually that m her opinion 
the war was not happemng The rocket bombs which fell daily on London 
were probably fired by the Government of Oceama itself, ‘just to keep people 
frightened’ This was an idea that had literally never occurred to him She also 
stirred a sort of envy m him by telling him that during the Two Minutes Hate 
her great difficulty was to avoid bursting out laughing But she only questioned 
the teachings of the Party when they m some way touched upon her own life. 
Often she was ready to accept the official mythology, simply because the 
difference between truth and falsehood did not seem important to her She 
believed, for instance, having learnt it at school, that the Party had invented 
aeroplanes, (In his own schooldays, Winston remembered, in the late ’fifties, it 
was only the helicopter that the Party claimed to have invented, a dozen years 
later, when Julia was at school, it was already claiming the aeroplane; one 
generation more, and it would be claiming the steam engine ) And when he 
told her that aeroplanes had been in existence before he was born, and long 



Nineteen Eighty -Four 835 

before the Revolution, the fact struck her as totally uninteresting After all, 
what did it matter who had invented aeroplanes’ It was rather more of a shock 
to him when he discovered from some chance remarks that she did not 
remember that Oceania, four years ago, had been at war with Eastasia and at 
peace with Eurasia It was true that she regarded the whole war as a sham but 
apparently she had not even noticed that the name of the enemy had changed 
‘I thought we’d always been at war with Eurasia,’ she said vaguely It 
frightened him a little The invention of aeroplanes dated from long before her 
birth, but the switchover in the war had happened only four years ago, well 
after she was grown up He argued with her about it for perhaps a quarter of an 
hour In the end he succeeded in forcing her memory back until she did dimly 
recall that at one time Eastasia and not Eurasia had been the enemy But the 
issue still struck her as unimportant ‘Who cares’’ she said impatiently ‘It’s 
always one bloody war after another, and one knows the news is all lies 
anyway ’ 

Sometimes he talked to her of the Records Department and the im pudent 
forgeries that he committed there Such things did not appear to horrify her 
She did not feel the abyss opening beneath her feet at the thought of lies 
becommg truths He told her the story of Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford 
and the momentous slip of paper which he had once held between his fingers 
It did not make much impression on her At first, indeed, she failed to grasp 
the point of the story 

‘Were they friends of yours’’ she said 

‘No, I never knew them They were Inner Party members Besides, they 
were far older men than I was They belonged to the old days, before the 
Revolution I barely knew them by sight ’ 

‘Then what was there to worry about’ People are being killed off all the time, 
aren’t they’’ 

He tried to make her understand ‘This was an exceptional case It wasn’t 
just a question of somebody being killed Do you realize that the past, starting 
from yesterday, has been actually abolished’ If it survives anywhere, it’s in a 
few solid objects with no words attached to them, like that lump of glass there 
Already we know almost literally nothing about the Revolution and the years 
before the Revolution Every record has been destroyed or falsified, every 
book has been rewritten, every picture has been repainted, every statue and 
street and building has been renamed, every date has been altered And that 
process is continuing day by day and minute by minute History has stopped 
Nothing exists except an endless present in which the Party is always right I 
know , of course, that the past is falsified, but it would never be possible for me 
to prove it, even when I did the falsification myself After the thing is done, no 
evidence ever remains The only evidence is inside my own mind, and I don’t 
know with any certainty that any other human being shares my memories Just 
in that one instance, m my whole life, I did possess actual concrete evidence 
after the event-years after it/ 

‘And what good was that’’ 

‘It was no good, because I threw it away a few minutes later. But if the same 



836 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

thing happened today, I should keep it * 

‘Well, I wouldn’t 1 ’ said Julia ‘I’m quite ready to take risks, but only for 
something worth while, not for bits of old newspaper What could you have 
done with it even if you had kept tf?’ 

‘Not much, perhaps But it was evidence It might have planted a few doubts 
here and there, supposing that I’d dared to show it to anybody I don’t imagine 
that we can alter anything in our own lifetime But one can imagine little knots 
of resistance springing up here and there-small groups of people banding 
themselves together, and gradually growing, and even leaving a few records 
behind, so that the next generation can carry on where we leave off ’ 

‘I’m not interested in the next generation, dear I’m interested m us ’ 
‘You’re only a rebel from the waist downwards,’ he told her 
She thought this brilliantly witty and flung her arms round him in delight 
In the ramifications of Party doctrine she had not the faintest interest 
Whenever he began to talk of the principles of Ingsoc, doublethink, the 
mutability of the past, and the demal of objective reality, and to use Newspeak 
words, she became bored and confused and said that she never paid any 
attention to that kind of thing One knew that it was all rubbish, so why let 
oneself be worried by tf? She knew when to cheer and when to boo, and that 
was all one needed If he persisted m talking of such subjects, she had a 
disconcerting habit of falling asleep She was one of those people who can go to 
sleep at any hour and m any position Talking to her, he realized how easy it 
was to present an appearance of orthodoxy while having no grasp whatever of 
what orthodoxy meant In a way, the world-view of the Party imposed itself 
most successfully on people incapable of understanding it They could be 
made to accept the most flagrant violations of reality, because they never fully 
grasped the enormity of what was demanded of them, and were not sufficiently 
interested in public events to notice what was happening. By lack of 
understanding they remained sane They simply swallowed everything, and 
what they swallowed did them no harm, because it left no residue behind, just 
as a gram of corn will pass undigested through the body of a bird 


6 


It had happened at last The expected message had come All his life, it seemed 
to him, he had been waiting for this to happen 
He was walking down the long corridor at the Ministry and he was almost at 
the spot where Julia had slipped the note into his hand when he became aware 
that someone larger than himself was walking just behind him The person, 
whoever it was, gave a small cough, evidently as a prelude to speaking 
Winston stopped abruptly and turned It was O’Brien 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 8 37 

At last they were face to face, and it seemed that his only impulse was to run 
away His heart bounded violently He would have been incapable of speaking 
O’Brien, however, had continued forward m the same movement, laying a 
friendly hand for a moment on Winston’s arm, so that the two of them were 
walking side by side He began speaking with the peculiar grave courtesy that 
differentiated him from the majority of Inner Party members 

‘I had been hoping for an opportunity of talking to you,’ he said ‘I was 
reading one of your Newspeak articles in The Times the other day You take a 
scholarly interest m Newspeak, I believe?’ 

Winston had recovered part of his self-possession ‘Hardly scholarly,’ he 
said ‘I’m only an amateur It’s not my subject I have never had anything to do 
with the actual construction of the language ’ 

‘But you write it very elegantly,’ said O’Brien ‘That is not only my own 
opimon I was talking recently to a friend of yours who is certainly an expert 
His name has slipped my memory for the moment ’ 

Again Winston’s heart stirred painfully It was inconceivable that this was 
anything other than a reference to Syme But Syme was not only dead, he was 
abolished, an unperson Any identifiable reference to him would have been 
mortally dangerous O’Brien’s remark must obviously have been intended as a 
signal, a codeword By sharing a small act of thoughtcrime he had turned the 
two of them into accomplices They had continued to stroll slowly down the 
corridor, but now O’Brien halted With the curious, disarming friendliness 
that he always managed to put into the gesture he resettled his spectacles on his 
nose Then he went on 

‘What I had really intended to say was that in your article I noticed you had 
used two words which have become obsolete But they have only become so 
very recently Have you seen the tenth edition of the Newspeak Dictionary?’ 
‘No,’ said Winston ‘I didn’t think it had been issued yet We are still using 
the ninth in the Records Department ’ 

‘The tenth edition is not due to appear for some months, I believe But a few 
advance copies have been circulated I have one myself It might interest you 
to look at it, perhaps?’ 

‘Very much so,’ said Winston, immediately seeing where this tended 
‘Some of the new developments are most ingenious The reduction m the 
number of verbs-that is the point that will appeal to you, I think Let me see, 
shall I send a messenger to you with the dictionary? But I am afraid I 
invariably forget anything of that kind Perhaps you could pick it up at my flat 
at some time that suited you? Wait Let me give you my address ’ 

They were standing m front of a telescreen Somewhat absentmmdedly 
O’Brien felt two of his pockets and then produced a small leather-covered 
notebook and a gold ink-pencil Immediately beneath the telescreen, in such a 
position that anyone who was watching at the other end of the instrument 
could read what he was writing, he scribbled an address, tore out the page and 
handed it to Winston, 

‘I am usually at home m the evening,’ he said ‘If not, my servant will give 
you the dictionary ’ 



8 38 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

He was gone, leaving Winston holding the scrap of paper, which this time 
there was no need to conceal Nevertheless he carefully memorized what was 
written on it, and some hours later dropped it into the memory hole along with 
a mass of other papers 

They had been talking to one another for a couple of minutes at the most 
There was only one meaning that the episode could possibly have It had been 
contrived as a way of letting Winston know O’Brien’s address This was 
necessary, because except by direct enquiry it was never possible to discover 
where anyone lived There were no directories of any kind ‘If you ever want to 
see me, this is where I can be found,’ was what O’Brien had been saying to him 
Perhaps there would even be a message concealed somewhere in the 
dictionary But at any rate, one thing was certain The conspiracy that he had 
dreamed of did exist, and he had reached the outer edges of it 

He knew that sooner or later he would obey O’Brien’s summons Perhaps 
tomorrow, perhaps after a long delay-he was not certain What was happening 
was only the workmg-out of a process that had started years ago The first step 
had been a secret, involuntary thought, the second had been the opening of the 
diary He had moved from thoughts to words, and now from words to actions 
The last step was something that would happen in the Ministry of Love He 
had accepted it The end was contained m the beginning But it was 
frightening or, more exactly, it was like a foretaste of death, like being a little 
less alive Even while he was speaking to O’Brien, when the meaning of the 
words had sunk m, a chilly shuddering feeling had taken possession of his 
body He had the sensation of stepping into the dampness of a grave, and it was 
not much better because he had always known that the grave was there and 
waiting for him 


7 


Winston had woken up with his eyes full of tears, Julia rolled sleepily against 
hun, murmuring something that might have been ‘What’s the matter^’ 

‘I dreamt-’ he began, and stopped short. It was too complex to be put into 
words There was the dream itself, and there was a memory connected with it 
that had swum into his mind m the few seconds after waking 
He lay bade with his eyes shut, still sodden in the atmosphere of the dream 
It was a vast, luminous dream m which his whole life seemed to stretch out 
before him like a landscape on a summer evening after rain It had all occurred 
inside the glass paperweight, but the surface of the glass was the dome of the 
sky, and inside the dome everything was flooded with clear soft light in which 
one could see into interminable distances The dream had also been 
comprehended by-indeed, m some sense it had consisted in-a gesture of the 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 839 

arm made by his mother, and made again thirty years later by the Jewish 
woman he had seen on the news film, trymg to shelter the small boy from the 
bullets, before the helicopters blew them both to pieces 

‘Do you know,’ he said, ‘that until this moment I believed I had murdered 
my mother?’ 

‘Why did you murder her?’ said Julia, almost asleep 

‘I didn’t murder her Not physically ’ 

In the dream he had remembered his last glimpse of his mother, and within a 
few moments of waking the cluster of small events surrounding it had all come 
back It was a memory that he must have deliberately pushed out of his 
consciousness over many years He was not certain of the date, but he could 
not have been less than ten years old, possibly twelve, when it had happened 

His father had disappeared some time earlier, how much earlier he could not 
remember He remembered better the rackety, uneasy circumstances of the 
time the periodical panics about air-raids and the sheltering in Tube stations, 
the piles of rubble everywhere, the unintelligible proclamations posted at 
street corners, the gangs of youths m shirts all the same colour, the enormous 
queues outside the bakeries, the intermittent machine-gun fire m the 
distance-above all, the fact that there was never enough to eat He 
remembered long afternoons spent with other boys m scrounging round 
dustbins and rubbish heaps, picking out the ribs of cabbage leaves, potato 
peelings, sometimes even scraps of stale breadcrust from which they carefully 
scraped away the cinders, and also in waiting for the passing of trucks which 
travelled over a certain route and were known to carry cattle feed, and which, 
when they jolted over the bad patches in the road, sometimes spilt a few 
fragments of oil-cake 

When his father disappeared, his mother did not show any surprise or any 
violent grief, but a sudden change came over her She seemed to have become 
completely spiritless It was evident even to Winston that she was waiting for 
something that she knew must happen She did everything that was 
needed-cooked, washed, mended, made the bed, swept the floor, dusted the 
mantelpiece-always very slowly and with a curious lack of superfluous 
motion, like an artist’s lay-figure moving of its own accord Her large shapely 
body seemed to relapse naturally into stillness For hours at a time she would 
sit almost immobile on the bed, nursing his young sister, a tiny, ailing, very 
silent child of two or three, with a face made simian by thinness Very 
occasionally she would take Wmston m her arms and press him against her for 
a long time without saying anything He was aware, in spite of his youthfulness 
and selfishness, that this was somehow connected with the never-mentioned 
thing that was about to happen 

He remembered the room where they lived, a dark, close-smelling room that 
seemed half filled by a bed with a white counterpane There was a gas ring in 
the fender, and a shelf where food was kept, and on the landing outside there 
was a brown earthenware sink, common to several rooms He remembered his 
mother’s statuesque body bending over the gas ring to stir at something m a 
saucepan Above all he remembered his continuous hunger, and the fierce 



840 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

sordid battles at meal-times He would ask his mother naggmgly, over and 
over again, why there was not more food, he would shout and storm at her (he 
even remembered the tones of his voice, which was beginning to break 
prematurely and sometimes boomed in a peculiar way), or he would attempt a 
snivelling note of pathos m his efforts to get more than his share His mother 
was quite ready to give him more than his share She took it for granted that he, 
‘the boy’, should have the biggest portion, but however much she gave him he 
invariably demanded more At every meal she would beseech him not to be 
selfish and to remember that his little sister was sick and also needed food, but 
it was no use He would cry out with rage when she stopped ladling, he would 
try to wrench the saucepan and spoon out of her hands, he would grab bits 
from his sister’s plate He knew that he was starving the other two, but he 
could not help it, he even felt that he had a right to do it The clamorous 
hunger in his belly seemed to justify him Between meals, if his mother did not 
stand guard, he was constantly pilfering at the wretched store of food on the 
shelf 

One day a chocolate-ration was issued There had been no such issue for 
weeks or months past He remembered quite clearly that precious little morsel 
of chocolate It was a two-ounce slab (they still talked about ounces m those 
days) between the three of them It was obvious that it ought to be divided into 
three equal parts Suddenly, as though he were listening to somebody else, 
Wmston heard himself demanding in a loud booming voice that he should be 
given the whole piece His mother told him not to be greedy There was a long, 
nagging argument that went round and round, with shouts, whines, tears, 
remonstrances, bargainings His tiny sister, clinging to her mother with both 
hands, exactly like a baby monkey, sat looking over her shoulder at him with 
large, mournful eyes In the end his mother broke off three-quarters of the 
chocolate and gave it to Winston, giving the other quarter to his sister The 
little girl took hold of it and looked at it duly, perhaps not knowing what it was 
Winston stood watching her for a moment Then with a sudden swift spring he 
had snatched the piece of chocolate out of his sister’s hand and was fleeing for 
the door 

‘Wmston, Wmston*’ his mother called after him ‘Come back* Give your 
sister back her chocolate!’ 

He stopped, but he did not come back His mother’s anxious eyes were fixed 
on his face Even now he was thinking about the thing, he did not knpw what it 
was that was on the point of happemng His sister, conscious of having been 
robbed of something, had set up a feeble wail His mother drew her arm round 
the child and pressed its face against her breast Something in the gesture told 
him that his sister was dying He turned and ftedjdown the stairs, with the 
chocolate growing sticky m his hand 

He never saw his mother again After he had. devoured the chocolate he felt 
somewhat ashamed ofhimself and hung about in the streets for several hours, 
Until hunger drove him home When he came back his mother had 
disappeared. This was already becommg normal at that time Nothing was 
gone from the room except his mother and his sister They had not taken any 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 841 

clothes, not even his mother’s overcoat To this day he did not know with any 
certainty that his mother was dead It was perfectly possible that she had 
merely been sent to a forced-labour camp As for his sister, she might have 
been removed, like Winston himself, to one of the colomes for homeless 
children (Reclamation Centres, they were called) which had grown up as a 
result of the civil war, or she might have been sent to the labour camp along 
with his mother, or simply left somewhere or other to die 
The dream was still vivid m his mind, especially the enveloping protecting 
gesture of the arm m which its whole meaning seemed to be contained His 
mind went back to another dream of two months ago Exactly as his mother 
had sat on the dingy white-quilted bed, with the child clmgmg to her, so she 
had sat in the sunken ship, far underneath him, and drowning deeper every 
minute, but still looking up at him through the darkemng water 

He told Julia the story of his mother’s disappearance Without opening her 
eyes she rolled over and settled herself into a more comfortable position 
T expect you were a beastly little swine in those days,’ she said indistinctly 
‘All children are swine ’ 

‘Yes But the real point of the story-’ 

From her breathing it was evident that she was going off to sleep again He 
would have liked to continue talking about his mother He did not suppose, 
from what he could remember of her, that she had been an unusual woman, 
still less an intelligent one; and yet she had possessed a kind of nobility, a kind 
of purity, simply because the standards that she obeyed were private ones Her 
feelings were her own, and could not be altered from outside It would not 
have occurred to her that an action which is ineffectual thereby becomes 
meaningless If you loved someone, you loved him, and when you had nothing 
else to give, you still gave him love When the last of the chocolate was gone, 
his mother had clasped the child in her arms It was no use, it changed nothing, 
it did not produce more chocolate, it did not avert the child’s death or her own, 
but it seemed natural to her to do it The refugee woman in the boat had also 
covered the little boy with her arm, which was no more use against the bullets 
than a sheet of paper The terrible thing that the Party had done was to 
persuade you that mere impulses, mere feelings, were of no account, while at 
the same time robbing you of all power over the material world When once 
you were in the grip of the Party, what you felt or did not feel, what you did or 
refrained from doing, made literally no difference. Whatever happened you 
vanished, and neither you nor your actions were ever heard of again Y ou were 
lifted clean out of the stream of history And yet to the people of only two 
generations ago this would not have seemed all-important, because they were 
not attempting to alter history They were governed by private loyalties which 
they did not question What mattered were individual relationships, and a 
completely helpless gesture, an embrace, a tear, a word spoken to a dying man, 
could have value in itself The proles, it suddenly occurred to him, had 
remained m this condition. They were not loyal to a party or a country or an 
idea, they were loyal to one another. For the first time m his life he did not 
despise the proles or think of them merely as an inert force which would one 



8 /f .2 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

day spring to life and regenerate the world The proles had stayed human 
They had not become hardened inside They had held on to the primitive 
emotions which he himself had to relearn by conscious effort And in thinking 
this he remembered, without apparent relevance, how a few weeks ago he had 
seen a severed hand lying on the pavement and had kicked it into the gutter as 
though it had been a cabbage-stalk 

‘The proles are human beings,’ he said aloud ‘We are not human ’ 

‘Why not?’ said Julia, who had woken up again 

He thought for a little while ‘Has it ever occurred to you, 5 he said, ‘that the 
best thing for us to do would be simply to walk out of here before it’s too late, 
and never see each other again?’ 

‘Yes, dear, it has occurred to me, several times But I’m not going to do it, all 
the same ’ 

‘We’ve been lucky,’ he said, ‘but it can’t last much longer You’re young 
You look normal and innocent If you keep clear of people like me, you might 
stay alive for another fifty years ’ 

‘No I’ve thought it all out What you do. I’m going to do And don’t be too 
downhearted I’m rather good at staying alive ’ 

‘We may be together for another six months-a year-there’s no knowing At 
the end we’re certain to be apart. Do you realize how utterly alone we shall be? 
When once they get hold of us there will be nothing, literally nothing, that 
either of us can do for the other If I confess, they’ll shoot you, and if I refuse to 
confess, they’ll shoot you just the same Nothing that I can do or say, or stop 
myself from saying, will put off your death for as much as five minutes Neither 
of us will even know whether the other is alive or dead We shall be utterly 
without power of any kind The one thing that matters is that we shouldn’t 
betray one another, although even that can’t make the slightest difference ’ 
‘If you mean confessing,’ she said, ‘we shall do that, right enough 
Everybody always confesses You can’t help it They torture you ’ 

‘I don’t mean confessing Confession is not betrayal What you say or do 
doesn’t matter only feelings matter If they could make me stop loving 
you-that would be the real betrayal ’ 

^^She thought it over ‘They can’t do that,’ she said finally. ‘It’s the one thing 
they can’t do. They can make you say anything-anyr/nng-but they can’t make 
you believe it They can’t get inside you ’ 

‘No,’ he said a little more hopefully, ‘no, that’s quite true They can’t get 
inside you If you can feel that staying human is worth while, even when it 
can’t have any result whatever, you’ve beaten them ’ 

He thought of the telescreen with its never-sleeping ear They could spy 
upon you night and day, but if you kept your head you could still outwit them 
With all their cleverness they had never mastered the secret of finding out what 
another human being was thinking Perhaps that was less true when you were 
actually in their hands. One did not know what happened inside the Ministry 
of Loves, but it was possible to guess tortures, drugs, delicate instruments that 
registered your nervous reactions, gradual wearing-down by sleeplessness and 
sobtude and persistent questioning Facts, at any rate, could not be kept 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 843 

hidden They could be tracked down by enquiry, they could be squeezed out of 
you by torture But if the object was not to stay alive but to stay human, what 
difference did it ultimately make? They could not alter your feelings for that 
matter you could not alter them yourself, even if you wanted to They could lay 
bare in the utmost detail everything that you had done or said or thought, but 
the inner heart, whose workings were mysterious even to yourself, remained 
impregnable 


8 


They had done it, they had done it at last* 

The room they were standing in was long-shaped and softly lit The 
telescreen was dimmed to a low murmur, the richness of the dark-blue carpet 
gave one the impression of treading on velvet At the far end of the room 
O’Brien was sitting at a table under a green-shaded lamp, with a mass of papers 
on either side of him He had not bothered to look up when the servant showed 
Julia and Winston m 

Winston’s heart was thumping so hard that he doubted whether he would be 
able to speak They had done it, they had done it at last, was all he could think 
It had been a rash act to come here at all, and sheer folly to arrive together, 
though it was true that they had come by different routes and only met on 
O’Brien’s doorstep But merely to walk into such a place needed an effort of the 
nerve It was only on very rare occasions that one saw inside the dwelling- 
places of the Inner Party, or even penetrated into the quarter of the town 
where they lived The whole atmosphere of the huge block of flats, the richness 
and spaciousness of everything, the unfamiliar smells of good food and 
tobacco, the silent and incredibly rapid lifts sliding up and down, the white- 
, jacketed servants hurrying to and fro-everything was intimidating Although 
he had a good pretext for coming here, he was haunted at every step by the fear 
that a black-uniformed guard would suddenly appear from round the corner, 
demand his papers, and order him to get out O’Brien’s servant, however, had 
admitted the two of them without demur He was a small, dark-haired man in a 
white jacket, with a diamond-shaped, completely expressionless face which 
might have been that of a Chmese The passage down which he led them was 
softly carpeted, with cream-papered walls and white wainscoting, all 
exquisitely clean That too was mtimidating Winston could not remember 
ever to have seen a passageway whose walls were not grimy from the contact of 
human bodies 

O’Brien had a slip of paper between his fingers and seemed to be studying it 
intently His heavy face, bent down so that one could see the line of the nose, 
looked both formidable and intelligent. For perhaps twenty seconds he sat 



844 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

without stirring Then he pulled the speakwnte towards him and rapped out a 
message m the hybrid jargon of the Ministries 

‘Items one comma five comma seven approved fullwise stop suggestion 
contained item six doubleplus ridiculous verging crimethmk cancel stop 
unproceed construction wise antegetting plusfull estimates machinery 
overheads stop end message ’ 

He rose deliberately from his chair and came towards them across the 
soundless carpet A little of the official atmosphere seemed to have fallen away 
from him with the Newspeak words, but his expression was grimmer than 
usual, as though he were not pleased at being disturbed The terror that 
Winston already felt was suddenly shot through by a streak of ordinary 
embarrassment It seemed to him quite possible that he had simply made a 
stupid mistake For what evidence had he m reality that O’Brien was any kind 
of political conspirator? Nothing but a flash of the eyes and a single equivocal 
remark beyond that, only his own secret imaginings, founded on a dream He 
could not even fall back on the pretence that he had come to borrow the 
dictionary, because in that case Julia’s presence was impossible to explain As 
O’Brien passed the telescreen a thought seemed to strike him He stopped, 
turned aside and pressed a switch on the wall There was a sharp snap The 
voice had stopped 

Julia uttered a tiny sound, a sort of squeak of surprise Even m the midst of 
his panic, Winston was too much taken aback to be able to hold his tongue 
‘You can turn it off’ he said 

‘Yes,’ said O’Brien, ‘we can turn it off We have that privilege ’ 

He was opposite them now His solid form towered over the pair of them, 
and the expression on his face was still indecipherable He was waiting, 
somewhat sternly, for Winston to speak, but about what? Even now it was 
quite conceivable that he was simply a busy man wondering irritably why he 
had been interrupted Nobody spoke After the stopping of the telescreen the 
room seemed deadly silent The seconds marched past, enormous With 
difficulty Winston continued to keep his eyes fixed on O’Brien’s Then 
suddenly the grim face broke down into what might have been the beginnings 
of a smile With his characteristic gesture O’Brien resettled his spectacles on 
his nose 

‘Shall I say it, or will you?’ he said 

‘I will say it,’ said Winston promptly ‘That thing is really turned off?’ 
‘Yes, everything is turned off. We are alone ’ 

‘We have come here because-’ 

He paused, realizing for the first time the vagueness of his own motives 
Since he did not in fact know what kind of help he expected from O’Brien, it 
was not easy to say why he had come here He went on, conscious that what he 
was saying must sound both feeble and pretentious 
‘We believe that there is some kind of conspiracy, some kmd of secret 
organization working against the Party, and that you are involved m it We 
want to join it and work for it We are enemies of the Party We disbelieve in 



Nineteen Eighty-Four _ 84s 

the principles of Ingsoc We are thought-criminals We are also adulterers I 
tell you this because we want to put ourselves at your mercy If you want us to 
incriminate ourselves in any other way, we are ready ’ 

He stopped and glanced over his shoulder, with the feeling that the door had 
opened Sure enough, the little yellow-faced servant had come in without 
knocking Winston saw that he was carrying a tray with a decanter and glasses 
‘Martin is one of us,’ said O’Brien impassively ‘Bring the drinks over here, 
Martin Put them on the round table Have we enough chairs? Then we may as 
well sit down and talk m comfort Bring a chair for yourself, Martin This is 
business You can stop being a servant for the next ten minutes 5 
The little man sat down, quite at his ease, and yet still with a servant-like air, 
the air of a valet enjoying a privilege Winston regarded him out of the corner 
of his eye It struck him that the man’s whole life was playing a part, and that 
he felt it to be dangerous to drop his assumed personality even for a moment 
O’Brien took the decanter by the neck and filled up the glasses with a dark-red 
liquid It aroused in Winston dim memories of something seen long ago on a 
wall or a hoardmg-a vast bottle composed of electric lights which seemed to 
move up and down and pour its contents into a glass Seen from the top the 
stuff looked almost black, but in the decanter it gleamed like a ruby It had a 
sour-sweet smell He saw Julia pick up her glass and sniff at it with frank 
curiosity 

‘It is called wine,’ said O’Brien with a faint smile ‘You will have read about 
it m books, no doubt Not much of it gets to the Outer Party, I am afraid ’ His 
face grew solemn again, and he raised his glass ‘I think it is fitting that we 
should begin by drinking a health To our Leader To Emmanuel Goldstein ’ 
Wmston took up his glass with a certain eagerness Wine was a thing he had 
read and dreamed about Like the glass paperweight or Mr Charnngton’s half- 
remembered rhymes, it belonged to the vanished, romantic past, the olden 
time as he liked to call it in his secret thoughts For some reason he had always 
thought of wine as having an intensely sweet taste, like that of blackberry jam 
and an immediate intoxicating effect Actually, when he came to swallow it, the 
stuff was distinctly disappointing The truth was that after years of gm- 
drmkmg he could barely taste it He set down the empty glass 
‘Then there is such a person as Goldstein?’ he said 
‘Yes, there is such a person, and he is alive. Where, I do not know ’ 

‘And the conspiracy-the organization? It is real? It is not simply an 
invention of the Thought Police?’ 

‘No, it is real. The Brotherhood, we call it You will never learn much more 
about the Brotherhood than that it exists and that you belong to it I will come 
back to that presently ’ He looked at his wrist-watch ‘It is unwise even for 
members of the Inner Party to turn off the telescreen for more than half an 
hour You ought not to have come here together, and you will have to leave 
separately You, Gomrade’-he bowed his head to Julia- ‘will leave first We 
have about twenty minutes at our disposal You will understand that I must 
start by asking you certain questions. In general terms, what are you prepared 
to do?’ 



8^6 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

‘Anything that we are capable of,’ said Winston 

O’Brien had turned himself a little m his chair so that he was facing 
Winston He almost ignored Julia, seeming to take it for granted that Winston 
could speak for her For a moment the lids flitted down over his eyes He began 
asking his questions m a low, expressionless voice, as though this were a 
routine, a sort of catechism, most of whose answers were known to him 
already 

‘You are prepared to give your lives’’ 

‘Yes’ 

‘You are prepared to commit murder’’ 

‘Yes ’ 

‘To commit acts of sabotage which may cause the death of hundreds of 
innocent people?’ 

‘Yes’ 

‘To betray your country to foreign powers’’ 

‘Yes ’ 

‘You are prepared to cheat, to forge, to blackmail, to corrupt the minds of 
children, to distribute habit-formmg drugs, to encourage prostitution, to 
disseminate venereal diseases-to do anything which is likely to cause 
demoralization and weaken the power of the Party’’ 

‘Yes’ 

‘If, for example, it would somehow serve our interests to throw sulphuric 
acid in a child’s face-are you prepared to do that’’ 

‘Yes’ 

‘You are prepared to lose your identity and live out the rest of your life as a 
waiter or a dock-worker’’ 

‘Yes’ 

‘You are prepared to commit suicide, if and when we order you to do so’’ 
‘Yes’ 

‘You are prepared, the two of you, to separate and never see one another 
again’’ 

‘No 1 ’ broke m Julia 

It appeared to Winston that a long time passed before he answered For a 
moment he seemed even to have been deprived of the power of speech His 
tongue worked soundlessly, forming the opemng syllables first of one word, 
then of the other, over and over again Until he had said it, he did not know 
which word he was gomg to say ‘No,’ he said finally 

‘You did well to tell me,’ said O’Brien ‘It is necessary for us to know 
everything.’ 

He turned himself toward Julia and added in a voice with somewhat more 
expression in it' 

‘Do you understand that even if he survives, it may be as a different person? 
We may be obliged to give him a new identity His face, his movements, the 
ahape ofhis hands, the colour of his hair-even his voice would be different 
And yon yourself might have become a different person Our surgeons can 
alffi people beyond recognition Sometimes it is necessary Sometimes we 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 


847 


even amputate a limb ’ 

Wmston could not help snatching another sidelong glance at Martin’s 
Mongolian face There were no scars that he could see Julia had turned a 
shade paler, so that her freckles were showing, but she faced O’Brien boldly 
She murmured something that seemed to be assent 
‘Good Then that is settled ’ 

There was a silver box of cigarettes on the table With a rather absent- 
minded air O’Brien pushed them towards the others, took one himself, then 
stood up and began to pace slowly to and fro, as though he could think better 
standing They were very good cigarettes, very thick and well packed, with an 
unfamiliar silkmess m the paper O’Brien looked at his wrist-watch again 
‘You had better go back to your pantry, Martin,’ he said ‘I shall switch on in 
a quarter of an hour Take a good look at these comrades’ faces before you go 
You will be seeing them again I may not 5 
Exactly as they had done at the front door, the little man’s dark eyes flickered 
over their faces There was not a trace of friendliness in his manner He was 
memorizing their appearance, but he felt no interest m them, or appeared to 
feel none It occurred to Winston that a synthetic face was perhaps incapable of 
changing its expression Without speaking or giving any kind of salutation, 
Martin went out, closing the door silently behind him O’Brien was strolling 
up and down, one hand in the pocket of his black overalls, the other holding his 
cigarette 

‘You understand,’ he said, ‘that you will be fighting m the dark You will 
always be in the dark You will receive orders and you will obey them, without 
knowing why Later I shall send you a book from which you will learn the true 
nature of the society we live in, and the strategy by which we shall destroy it 
When you have read the book, you will be full members of the Brotherhood 
But between the general aims that we are fighting for, and the immediate tasks 
of the moment, you will never know anything I tell you that the Brotherhood 
exists, but I cannot tell you whether it numbers a hundred members, or ten 
million From your personal knowledge you will never be able to say that it 
numbers even as many as a dozen You will have three or four contacts, who 
will be renewed from time to time as they disappear As this was your first 
contact, it will be preserved When you receive orders, they will come from 
me If we find it necessary to communicate with you, it will be through Martin 
When you are finally caught, you will confess That is unavoidable, But you 
will have very little to confess, other than your own actions You will not be 
able to betray more than a handful of unimportant people Probably you will 
not even betray me. By that time I may be dead, or I shall have become a 
different person, with a different face ’ 

He continued to move to and fro over the soft carpet In spite of the 
bulkmess of his body there was a remarkable grace m his movements It came 
out even in the gesture with which he thrust a hand into his pocket, or 
manipulated a cigarette More even than of strength, he gave an impression of 
confidence and of an understanding tinged by irony However much in earnest 
he might be, he had nothing of the singie-mmdedness that belongs to a fanatic 



848 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

When he spoke of murder, suicide, venereal disease, amputated limbs, and 
altered faces, it was with a faint air of persiflage ‘This is unavoidable, 5 his 
voice seemed to say, ‘this is what we have got to do, unflinchingly But this is 
not what we shall be doing when life is worth living again 5 A wave of 
admiration, almost of worship, flowed out from Winston towards O’Brien For 
the moment he had forgotten the shadowy figure of Goldstein When you 
looked at O’Brien’s powerful shoulders and his blunt-featured face, so ugly 
and yet so civilized, it was impossible to believe that he could be defeated 
There was no stratagem that he was not equal to, no danger that he could not 
foresee Even Julia seemed to be impressed She had let her cigarette go out 
and was listening intently O’Brien went on 

‘You will have heard rumours of the existence of the Brotherhood No doubt 
you have formed your own picture of it You have imagined, probably, a huge 
underworld of conspirators, meeting secretly m cellars, scribbling messages on 
walls, recognizing one another by code words or by special movements of the 
hand Nothing of the kind exists The members of the Brotherhood have no 
way of recognizing one another, and it is impossible for any one member to be 
aware of the identity of more than a few others Goldstein himself, if he fell 
into the hands of the Thought Police, could not give them a complete list of 
members, or any information that would lead them to a complete list No such 
list exists The Brotherhood cannot be wiped out because it is not an 
organization in the ordinary sense Nothing holds it together except an idea 
which is indestructible You will never have anything to sustam you, except 
the idea You will get no comradeship and no encouragement When finally 
you are caught, you will get no help We never help our members At most, 
when it is absolutely necessary that someone should be silenced, we are 
occasionally able to smuggle a razor blade into a prisoner’s cell You will have 
to get used to living without results and without hope You will work for a 
while, you will be caught, you will confess, and then you will die Those are the 
only results that you will ever see There is no possibility that any perceptible 
change will happen within our own lifetime We are the dead Our only true 
life is in the future. We shall take part in it as handfuls of dust and splmters of 
bone But how far away that future may be, there is no knowmg. It might be a 
thousand years. At present nothing is possible except to extend the area of 
sanity little by little We cannot act collectively We can only spread our 
knowledge outwards from individual to individual, generation after 
generation In the face of the Thought Police, there is no other way ’ 

He halted and looked for the third time at his wrist-watch 
‘It is almost time for you to leave, comrade,’ he said to Juha ‘Wait The 
decanter is still half full ’ 

He filled the glasses and raised his own glass by the stem 
‘What shall it be this time* 1 ’ he said, still with the same faint suggestion of 
homy. ‘To the confusion of the Thought Police? To the death of Big Brother? 
To humanity? To the future?’ 

‘To the past,’ said Wmston 

- ‘The past is more important,’ agreed O’Brien gravely 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 849 

They emptied their glasses, and a moment later Julia stood up to go O’Brien 
took a small box from the top of a cabinet and handed her a flat white tablet 
which he told her to place on her tongue It was important, he said, not to go 
out smelling of wine the lift attendants were very observant As soon as the 
door had shut behind her he appeared to forget her existence He took another 
pace or two up and down, then stopped 

‘There are details to be settled,’ he said ‘I assume that you have a hi din g- 
place of some kind?’ 

Winston explained about the room over Mr Charrington’s shop 

‘That will do for the moment Later we will arrange something else for you 
It is important to change one’s hiding-place frequently Meanwhile I shall 
send you a copy of the book’ -even O’Brien, Wmston noticed, seemed to 
pronounce the words as though they were in itahc-‘Goldstem’s book, you 
understand, as soon as possible It may be some days before I can get hold of 
one There are not many m existence, as you can imagine The Thought Police 
hunt them down and destroy them almost as fast as we can produce them It 
makes very little difference The book is indestructible If the last copy were 
gone, we could reproduce it almost word for word Do you carry a brief-case to 
work with you?’ he added 

‘As a rule, yes ’ 

‘What is it like?’ 

‘Black, very shabby With two straps ’ 

‘Black, two straps, very shabby-good One day m the fairly near future - 1 
cannot give a date-one of the messages among your mornmg’s work will 
contain a misprinted word, and you will have to ask for a repeat On the 
following day you will go to work without your brief-case At some time 
during the day, m the street, a man will touch you on the arm and say “I think 
you have dropped your brief-case ” The one he gives you will contain a copy of 
Goldstein’s book You will return it within fourteen days ’ 

They were silent for a moment 

‘There are a couple of minutes before you need go,’ said O’Brien ‘We shall 
meet agam-if we do meet again-’ 

Winston looked up at him ‘In the place where there is no darkness?’ he said 
hesitantly 

O’Brien nodded without appearance of surprise ‘In the place where there is 
no darkness,’ he said, as though he had recognized the allusion ‘And in the 
meantime, is there anything that you wish to say before you leave? Any 
message? Any question?’ 

Winston thought There did not seem to be any further question that he 
wanted to ask. still less did he feel any impulse to utter high-sounding 
generalities Instead of anything directly connected with O’Brien or the 
Brotherhood, there came into his mmd a sort of composite picture of the dark 
bedroom where his mother had spent her last days, and the little room over Mr 
Charrington’s shop, and the glass paperweight, and the steel engraving m its 
rosewood frame Almost at random he said: 

‘Did you ever happen to hear an old rhyme that begins “Oranges and 



850 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

lemons, say the bells of St Clement’s 

Again O’Brien nodded With a sort of grave courtesy he completed the 
stanza 


Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement’s, 

You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin’s, 
When will you pay me ? say the bells of Old Bailey, 
When I grow rich, say the bells of Shoreditch ’ 


‘You knew the last line 1 ’ said Winston 

‘Yes, I knew the last line And now, I am afraid, it is time for you to go But 
wait You had better let me give you one of these tablets ’ 

As Winston stood up O’Brien held out a hand His powerful grip crushed 
the bones of Winston’s palm At the door Winston looked back, but O’Brien 
seemed already to be m process of putting him out of mind He was waiting 
with his hand on the switch that controlled the telescreen Beyond him 
Winston could see the writing-table with its green-shaded lamp and the 
speakwnte and the wire baskets deep-laden with papers The incident was 
closed Within thirty seconds, it occurred to him, O’Brien would be back at his 
interrupted and important work on behalf of the Party 


9 


Winston was gelatinous with fatigue Gelatinous was the right word It had 
come into his head spontaneously His body seemed to have not only the 
weakness of a jelly, but its translucency He felt that if he held up his hand he 
would be able to see the light through it All the blood and lymph had been 
drained out of him by an enormous debauch of work, leaving only a frail 
structure of nerves, bones, and skin All sensations seemed to be magnified 
His overalls fretted his shoulders, the pavement tickled his feet, even the 
opening and closing of a hand was an effort that made his joints creak 
He had worked more than ninety hours in five days So had everyone else m 
the Ministry Now it was all over, and he had literally nothing to do, no Party 
work of any description, until tomorrow morning He could spend six hours in 
the hiding-place and another nine in his own bed. Slowly, in mild afternoon 
sunshine, he walked up a dingy street m the direction of Mr Charrmgton’s 
shop, keeping one eye open for the patrols, but irrationally convinced that this 
afternoon there was no danger of anyone interfering with him. The heavy 
bnef-case that he was carrying bumped against his knee at each step, sending a 
tingling sensation up and down the skm of his leg Inside it was the book , which 
he had now had in his possession for six days and had not yet opened, nor even 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 8 51 

On the sixth day of Hate Week, after the processions, the speeches, the 
shouting, the singing, the banners, the posters, the films, the waxworks, the 
rolling of drums and squealing of trumpets, the tramp of marching feet, the 
grinding of the caterpillars of tanks, the roar of massed planes, the boo ming of 
guns— after six days of this, when the great orgasm was quivering to its climax 
and the general hatred of Eurasia had boiled up into such delirium that if the 
crowd could have got their hands on the 2,000 Eurasian war-cnmmals who were 
to be publicly hanged on the last day of the proceedings, they would 
unquestionably have torn them to pieces-at just this moment it had been 
announced that Oceania was not after all at war with Eurasia Oceania was at 
war with Eastasia Eurasia was an ally 

There was, of course, no admission that any change had taken place Merely 
it became known, with extreme suddenness and everywhere at once, that 
Eastasia and not Eurasia was the enemy Winston was taking part in a 
demonstration in one of the central London squares at the moment when it 
happened It was night, and the white faces and the scarlet banners were 
luridly floodlit The square was packed with several thousand people, 
including a block of about a thousand schoolchildren in the umform of the 
Spies On a scarlet-draped platform an orator of the Inner Party, a small lean 
man with disproportionately long arms and a large bald skull over which a few 
lank locks straggled, was haranguing the crowd A little Rumpelstiltskin 
figure, contorted with hatred, he gripped the neck of the microphone with one 
hand while the other, enormous at the end of a bony arm, clawed the air 
menacingly above his head His voice, made metallic by the amplifiers, 
boomed forth an endless catalogue of atrocities, massacres, deportations, 
lootings, rapmgs, torture of prisoners, bombing of civilians, lying propaganda, 
unjust aggressions, broken treaties It was almost impossible to listen to him 
without being first convinced and then maddened At every few moments the 
fury of the crowd boiled over and the voice of the speaker was drowned by a 
wild beast-like roaring that rose uncontrollably from thousands of throats 
The most savage yells of all came from the schoolchildren The speech had 
been proceeding for perhaps twenty minutes when a messenger hurried on to 
the platform and a scrap of paper was slipped into the speaker’s hand He 
unrolled and read it without pausing m his speech Nothing altered m his voice 
or manner, or m the content of what he was saying, but suddenly the names 
were different Without words said, a wave of understanding rippled through 
the crowd Oceania was at war with Eastasia 1 The next moment there was a 
tremendous commotion The banners and posters with which the square was 
decorated were all wrong* Quite half of them had the wrong faces on them It 
was sabotage! The agents of Goldstein had been at work* There was a riotous 
interlude while posters were ripped from the walls, banners torn to shreds and 
trampled underfoot. The Spies performed prodigies of activity m clambering 
over the rooftops and cutting the streamers that fluttered from the chimneys 
But within two or three minutes it was all over The orator, still gripping the 
neck of the microphone, his shoulders hunched forward, his free hand clawing 
at the air, had gone straight on with his speech One minute more, and the feral 



852 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

roars of rage were again bursting from the crowd The Hate continued exactly 
as before, except that the target had been changed 
The thing that impressed Winston in looking back was that the speaker had 
switched from one line to the other actually in mid-sentence, not only without 
a pause, but without even breaking the syntax But at the moment he had other 
things to preoccupy him It was during the moment of disorder while the 
posters were being torn down that a man whose face he did not see had tapped 
him on the shoulder and said, ‘Excuse me, I think you’ve dropped your brief- 
case ’ He took the brief-case abstractedly, without speaking He knew that it 
would be days before he had an opportunity to look inside it The instant that 
the demonstration was over he went straight to the Ministry of Truth, though 
the time was now nearly twenty-three hours The entire staff of the Ministry 
had done likewise The orders already issuing from the telescreens, recalling 
them to their posts, were hardly necessary 

Oceania was at war with Eastasia Oceania had always been at war with 
Eastasia A large part of the political literature of five years was now completely 
obsolete Reports and records of all kinds, newspapers, books, pamphlets, 
films, sound tracks, photographs-all had to be rectified at lightning speed 
Although no directive was ever issued, it was known that the chiefs of the 
Department intended that within one week no reference to the war with 
Eurasia, or the alliance with Eastasia, should remain m existence anywhere 
The work was overwhelming, all the more so because the processes that it 
involved could not be called by their true names Everyone in the Records 
Department worked eighteen hours in the twenty-four, with two three-hour 
snatches of sleep Mattresses were brought up from the cellars and pitched all 
over the corridors meals consisted of sandwiches and Victory Coffee wheeled 
round on trolleys by attendants from the canteen Each time that Winston 
broke off for one of his spells of sleep he tried to leave his desk clear of work, 
and each time that he crawled back sticky-eyed and aching, it was to find that 
another shower of paper cylinders had covered the desk like a snowdrift, half- 
burymg the speakwrite and overflowing on to the floor, so that the first job was 
always to stack them into a neat enough pile to give him room to work What 
was worst of all was that the work was by no means purely mechanical Often it 
was enough merely to substitute one name for another, but any detailed report 
of events demanded care and imagination Even the geographical knowledge 
that one needed m transferring the war from one part of the world to another 
was considerable 

By the third day his eyes ached unbearably and his spectacles needed wiping 
every few minutes. It was like struggling with some crushmg physical task, 
something which one had the right to refuse and which one was nevertheless 
neurotically anxious to accomplish In so far as he had time to remember it, he 
was not troubled by the fact that every word he murmured into the speakwrite, 
every stroke of his ink-pencil, was a deliberate lie He was as anxious as anyone 
else in the Department that the forgery should be perfect On the morning of 
the sixth day the dribble of cylinders slowed down For as much as half an hour 
nothing came out of the tube, then one more cylinder, then nothing 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 833 

Everywhere at about the same time the work was easmg off A deep and as it 
were secret sigh went through the Department A mighty deed, which could 
never be mentioned, had been achieved It was now impossible for any human 
being to prove by documentary evidence that the war with Eurasia had ever 
happened At twelve hundred it was unexpectedly announced that all workers 
m the Ministry were free till tomorrow morning Winston, still carrying the 
brief-case containing the book , which had remained between his feet while he 
worked and under his body while he slept, went home, shaved himself, and 
almost fell asleep in his bath, although the water was barely more than tepid 
With a sort of voluptuous creaking in his joints he climbed the stair above 
Mr Charrmgton’s shop He was tired, but not sleepy any longer He opened 
the window, lit the dirty little oilstove and put on a pan of water for coffee 
Julia would arrive presently meanwhile there was the book He sat down m the 
sluttish armchair and undid the straps of the brief-case 
A heavy black volume, amateurishly bound, with no name or title on the 
cover The print also looked slightly irregular The pages were worn at the 
edges, and fell apart, easily, as though the book had passed through many 
hands The inscription on the title-page ran 

THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF 
OLIGARCHICAL COLLECTIVISM 

BY 

EMMANUEL GOLDSTEIN 


Winston began reading 


CHAPTER I 

IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH 

Throughout recorded time, and probably since the end of the Neolithic Age, there have been three 
kinds of people in the world, the High, the Middle, and the Low They have been subdivided in 
many ways, they have borne countless different names, and their relative numbers, as well as their 
attitude towards one another, have varied from age to age but the essential structure of society has 
never altered Even after enormous upheavals and seemingly irrevocable changes, the same 
pattern has always reasserted itself, just as a gyroscope will always return to equilibrium, however 
far it is pushed one way or the other 
The aims of these groups are entirely irreconcilable 

Wmston stopped reading, chiefly m order to appreciate the fact that he was 
reading, in comfort and safety He was alone no telescreen, no ear at the 
keyhole, no nervous impulse to glance over his shoulder or cover the page with 
his hand The sweet summer air played against his cheek From somewhere far 
away there floated the famt shouts of children m the room itself there was no 
sound except the insect voice of the clock He settled deeper into the arm-chair 
and put his feet up on the fender It was bliss, it was eternity Suddenly, as one 
sometimes does with a book of which one knows that one will ultimately read 
and re-read every word, he opened it at a different place and found himself at 
Chapter III He went on reading. 



8 54 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

CHAPTER III 
WAR IS PEACE 

The splitting up of the world into three great super-states was an event which could be and indeed 
was foreseen before the middle of the twentieth century With the absorption of Europe by Russia 
and of the British Empire by the United States, two of the three existing powers, Eurasia and 
Oceania, were already effectively m being The third, Eastasia, only emerged as a distinct unit after 
another decade of confused fighting The frontiers between the three super-states are in some 
places arbitrary, and in others they fluctuate according to the fortunes of war, but in general they 
follow geographical lines Eurasia comprises the whole of the northern part of the European and 
Asiatic land-mass, from Portugal to the Bering Strait Oceania comprises the Americas, the 
Atlantic islands including the British Isles, Australasia, and the southern portion of Africa 
Eastasia, smaller than the others and with a less definite western frontier, comprises China and the 
countries to the south of it, the Japanese islands and a large but fluctuating portion of Manchuria, 
Mongolia, and Tibet 

In one combination or another, these three super-states are permanently at war, and have been 
so for the past twenty-five years War, however, is no longer the desperate, annihilating struggle 
that it was in the early decades of the twentieth century It is a warfare of limited aims between 
combatants who are unable to destroy one another, have no material cause for fighting and are not 
divided by any genuine ideological difference This is not to say that either the conduct of war, or 
the prevailing attitude towards it, has become less bloodthirsty or more chivalrous On the 
contrary, war hysteria is continuous and universal in all countries, and such acts as raping, looting, 
the slaughter of children, the reduction of whole populations to slavery, and reprisals against 
prisoners which extend even to boiling and burying alive, are looked upon as normal, and, when 
they are committed by one’s own side and not by the enemy, meritorious But in a physical sense 
war involves very small numbers of people, mostly highly-trained specialists, and causes 
comparatively few casualties The fighting, when there is any, takes place on the vague frontiers 
whose whereabouts the average man can only guess at, or around the Floating Fortresses which 
guard strategic spots on the sea lanes In the centres of civilization war means no more than a 
continuous shortage of consumption goods, and the occasional crash of a rocket bomb which may 
cause a few scores of deaths War has in fact changed its character More exactly, the reasons for 
which war is waged have changed m their order of importance Motives which were already 
present to some small extent in the great wars of the early twentieth century have now become 
dominant and are consciously recognized and acted upon 

To understand the nature of the present war-for m spite of the regrouping which occurs every 
few years, it is always the same war-one must realize in the first place that it is impossible for it to 
be decisive None of the three super-states could be definitively conquered even by the other two 
in combination They are too evenly matched, and their natural defences are too formidable 
Eurasia is protected by its vast land spaces, Oceania by the width of the Atlantic and the Pacific, 
Eastasia by the fecundity and industriousness of its inhabitants Secondly, there is no longer, in a 
material sense, anything to fight about With the establishment of self-contained economies, m 
which production and consumption are geared to one another, the scramble for markets which was 
a mam cause of previous wars has come to an end, while the competition for raw materials is no 
longer a matter of life and death In any case each of the three super-states is so vast that it can 
obtain almost all the materials that it needs within its own boundaries In so far as the war has a 
direct economic purpose, it is a war for labour power Between the frontiers of the super-states, 
and not permanently m the possession of any of them, there lies a rough quadrilateral with its 
corners at Tangier, Brazzaville, Darwin, and Hong Kong, containing within it about a fifth of the 
population of the earth It is for the possession of these thickly-populated regions, and of the 
northern ice-cap, that the three powers are constantly struggling In practice no one power ever 
controls the whole of the disputed area Portions of it are constantly changing hands, and it is the 
Chance of seizing this or that fragment by a sudden stroke of treachery that dictates the endless 
changes of ahgfiment 

j All of die disputed territories contain valuable minerals, and some of them yield important 
Vegetable products such as rubber which m colder climates it is necessary to synthesize by 
comparatively expensive methods But above all they contain a bottomless reserve of cheap labour 
Whichever power controls equatorial Africa, or the countries of the Middle East, or Southern 
India* or the Indonesian Archipelago, disposes also of the bodies of scores or hundreds of mil lions 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 855 

of ill-paid and hard-working coolies The inhabitants of these areas, reduced more or less openly 
to the status of slaves, pass continually from conqueror to conqueror, and are expended like so 
much coal or oil in the race to turn out more armaments, to capture more territory, to control more 
labour power, to turn out more armaments, to capture more territory, and so on indefinitely It 
should be noted that the fighting never really moves beyond the edges of the disputed areas The 
frontiers of Eurasia flow back and forth between the basin of the Congo and the northern shore of 
the Mediterranean, the islands of the Indian Ocean and the Pacific are constantly being captured 
and recaptured by Oceania or by Eastasia, in Mongolia the dividing line between Eurasia and 
Eastasia is never stable, round the Pole all three powers lay claim to enormous territories which in 
fact are largely uninhabited and unexplored but the balance of power always remains roughly 
even, and the territory which forms the heartland of each super-state always remains inviolate 
Moreover, the labour of the exploited peoples round the Equator is not really necessary to the 
world’s economy They add nothing to the wealth of the world, since whatever they produce is 
used for purposes of war, and the object of waging a war is always to be in a better position in which 
to wage another war By their labour the slave populations allow the tempo of continuous warfare 
to be speeded up But if they did not exist, the structure of world society, and the process by which 
it maintains itself, would not be essentially different 

The primary aim of modern warfare (in accordance with the principles of doublethink , this aim is 
simultaneously recognized and not recognized by the directing brains of the Inner Party) is to use 
up the products of the machine without raising the general standard of living Even since the end 
of the nineteenth century, the problem of what to do with the surplus of consumption goods has 
been latent m industrial society At present, when few human beings even have enough to eat, this 
problem is obviously not urgent, and it might not have become so, even if no artificial processes of 
destruction had been at work. The world of today is a bare, hungry, dilapidated place compared 
with the world that existed before 1914, and still more so if compared with the imaginary future to 
which the people of that period looked forward In the early twentieth century, the vision of a 
future society unbelievably rich, leisured, orderly, and efficient-a glittering antiseptic world of 
glass and steel and snow-white concrete-was part of the consciousness of nearly every literate 
person Science and technology were developing at a prodigious speed, and it seemed natural to 
assume that they would go on developing This failed to happen, partly because of the 
impoverishment caused by a long series of wars and revolutions, partly because scientific and 
techmcal progress depended on the empirical habit of thought, which could not survive m a 
strictly regimented society As a whole the world is more primitive today than it was fifty years 
ago Certain backward areas have advanced, and various devices, always m some way connected 
with warfare and police espionage, have been developed, but experiment and invention have 
largely stopped, and the ravages of the atomic war of the -nineteen-fifties have never been fully 
repaired Nevertheless the dangers inherent in the machine are still there From the moment when 
the machine first made its appearance it was clear to all thinking people that the need for human 
drudgery, and therefore to a great extent for human inequality, had disappeared If the machine 
were used deliberately for that end, hunger, overwork, dirt, illiteracy, and disease could be 
eliminated within a few generations And in fact, without being used for any such purpose, but by 
a sort of automatic process-by producing wealth which it was sometimes impossible not to 
distribute-the machine did raise the living standards of the average human being very greatly over 
a period of about fifty years at the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth 
centuries. 

But it was also clear that an all-round increase in wealth threatened the destruction-mdeed, in 
some sense was the destruction-of a hierarchical society In a world in which everyone worked 
short hours, had enough to eat, lived m a house with a bathroom and a refrigerator, and possessed a 
motor-car or even. an aeroplane, the most obvious and perhaps the most important form of 
inequality would already have disappeared If it once became general, wealth would confer no 
distinction It was possible, no doubts to imagine a society in which wealth, in the sense of personal 
possessions and luxuries, should be evenly distributed, while power remained in the hands of a 
small privileged caste But in practice such a society could not long remain stable For if leisure 
and security were enjoyed by all alike, the great mass of human beings who are normally stupefied 
by poverty would become literate and would learn to think for themselves, and when once they had 
done this, they would sooner or later realize that the privileged minority had no function, and they 
would sweep it away In the king run, a hierarchical society was only possible on a basis of poverty 
and ignorance To return to the agricultural past, as some thinkers about the beginning of the 



8 56 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

twentieth century dreamed of doing, was not a practicable solution It conflicted with the tendency 
towards mechanization which had become quasi-instinctive throughout almost the whole world, 
and moreover, any country which remained industrially backward was helpless m a military sense 
and was bound to be dominated, directly or indirectly, by its more advanced rivals 

Nor was it a satisfactory solution to keep the masses in poverty by restricting the output of 
goods This happened to a great extent during the final phase of capitalism, roughly between 1920 
and 1940 The economy of many countries was allowed to stagnate, land went out of cultivation, 
capital equipment was not added to, great blocks of the population were prevented from working 
and kept half alive by State chanty But this, too, entailed military weakness, and since the 
privations it inflicted were obviously unnecessary, it made opposition inevitable The problem was 
how to keep the wheels of industry turning without increasing the real wealth of the world Goods 
must be produced, but they must not be distributed And in practice the only way of achieving this 
was by continuous warfare 

The essential act of war is destruction, not necessarily of human lives, but of the products of 
human labour War is a way of shattering to pieces, or pounng into the stratosphere, or sinkmg in 
the depths of the sea, materials which might otherwise be used to make the masses too 
comfortable, and hence, in the long run, too intelligent Even when weapons of war are not 
actually destroyed, their manufacture is still a convenient way of expending labour power without 
producing anything that can be consumed A Floating Fortress, for example, has locked up m it 
the labour that would build several hundred cargo-ships Ultimately it is scrapped as obsolete, 
never having brought any material benefit to anybody, and with further enormous labours another 
Floating Fortress is built In principle the war effort is always so planned as to eat up any surplus 
that might exist after meeting the bare needs of the population In practice the needs of the 
population are always under-estimated, with the result that there is a chronic shortage of half the 
necessities of life, but this is looked on as an advantage It is deliberate policy to keep even the 
favoured groups somewhere near the brink of hardship, because a general state of scarcity 
increases the importance of small privileges and thus magnifies the distinction between one group 
and another By the standards of the early twentieth century, even a member of the Inner Party 
lives an austere, laborious kind of life Nevertheless, the few luxuries that he does enjoy-his large, 
well-appointed flat, the better texture of his clothes, the better quality of his food and drink and 
tobacco, his two or three servants, his private motor-car or helicopter-set him in a different world 
from a member of the Outer Party, and the members of the Outer Party have a similar advantage m 
comparison with the submerged masses whom we call ‘the proles’ The social atmosphere is that of 
a besieged city, where the possession of a lump of horseflesh makes the difference between wealth 
and poverty And at the same time the consciousness of being at war, and therefore in danger, 
makes the handing-over of all power to a small caste seem the natural, unavoidable condition of 
survival 

War, it will be seen, not only accomplishes the necessary destruction, but accomplishes it m a 
psychologically acceptable way In principle it would be quite simple to waste the surplus labour 
of the world by building temples and pyramids, by digging holes and filling them up again, or even 
by producing vast quantities of goods and then setting fire to them But this would provide only 
the economic and not the emotional basis for a hierarchical society What is concerned here is not 
the morale of the masses, whose attitude is unimportant so long as they are kept steadily at work, 
but the morale of the Party itself Even the humblest Party member is expected to be competent, 
industrious, and even intelligent within narrow limits, but it is also necessary that he should be a 
credulous, and ignorant fanatic whose prevailing moods are fear, hatred, adulation, and orgiastic 
triumph. In other words it is necessary that he should have the mentality appropriate to a state of 
war It does not matter whether the war is actually happening, and, since no decisive victory is 
possible, it does not matter whether the war is going well or badly All that is needed is that a state 
of war should exist The splitting of the intelligence which the Party requires of its members, and 
which is more easily achieved in an atmosphere of war, is now almost universal, but the higher up 
the tanks one goes>tfaemore marked it becomes It is precisely in the Inner Party that war hysteria 
and hatred-df the enemy are strongest In his capacity as an administrator, it is often necessary for a 
memfjer ofthe Inner Party to know that this or that item of war news is untruthful, and he may 
, often!: be a$te®e that the entire war is spurious and is either not happening or is being waged for 
pqjpposes quite Other than the declared ones but such knowledge is easily neutralized by the 
technique efkdoublethink Meanwhile no Inner Pasty member wavers for an instant m his mystical 
b^||e$: patsshe war ts real, and that it is bound to end victoriously, with Oceania the undisputed 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 


857 


master of the entire world 

All members of the Inner Party believe m this coming conquest as an article of faith It is to be 
achieved either by gradually acquiring more and more territory and so building up an 
overwhelming preponderance of power, or by the discovery of some new and unanswerable 
weapon The search for new weapons continues unceasingly, and is one of the very few re maini n g 
activities in which the inventive or speculative type of mind can find any outlet In Oceania at the 
present day, Science, m the old sense, has almost ceased to exist In Newspeak there is no word for 
‘Science’ The empirical method of thought, on which all the scientific achievements of the past 
were founded, is opposed to the most fundamental principles of Ingsoc And even technological 
progress only happens when its products can in some way be used for the diminution of human 
liberty In all the useful arts the world is either standing still or going backwards The fields are 
cultivated with horse-ploughs while books are written by machinery But m matters of vital 
importance-meaning, in effect, war and police espionage-the empirical approach is still 
encouraged, or at least tolerated The two aims of the Party are to conquer the whole surface of the 
earth and to extinguish once and for all the possibility of independent thought There are therefore 
two great problems which the Party is concerned to solve One is how to discover, against his will, 
what another human being is thinking, and the other is how to kill several hundred million people 
in a few seconds without giving warning beforehand In so far as scientific research still continues, 
this is its subject-matter The scientist of today is either a mixture of psychologist and inquisitor, 
studying with real ordinary minuteness the meaning of facial expressions, gestures, and tones of 
voice, and testing the truth-producing effects of drugs, shock therapy, hypnosis, and physical 
torture, or he is chemist, physicist, or biologist concerned only with such branches of his special 
Subject as are relevant to the taking of life In the vast laboratories of the Ministry of Peace, and in 
the experimental stations hidden in the Brazilian forests, or in the Australian desert, or on lost 
islands of the Antarctic, the teams of experts are mdefatigably at work Some are concerned simply 
with planning the logistics of future wars, others devise larger and larger rocket bombs, more and 
more powerful explosives, and more and more impenetrable armour-plating, others search for 
new and deadlier gases, or for soluble poisons capable of being produced m such quantities as to 
destroy the vegetation of whole continents, or for breeds of disease germs immunized against all 
possible antibodies, others strive to produce a vehicle that shall bore its way under the soil like a 
submarine under the water, or an aeroplane as independent of its base as a sailing-ship, others 
explore even remoter possibilities such as focusing the sun’s rays through lenses suspended 
thousands of kilometres away in space, or producing artificial earthquakes and tidal waves by 
tapping the heat at the earth’s centre 

But none of these projects ever comes anywhere near realization, and none of the three super- 
states ever gams a significant lead on the others What is more remarkable is that all three powers 
already possess, m the atomic bomb, a weapon far more powerful than any that their present 
researches are likely to discover Although the Party, according to its habit, claims the invention 
for itself, atomic bombs first appeared as early as the nineteen-forties, and were first used on a large 
scale about ten years later At that tune some hundreds of bombs were dropped on industrial 
centres, chiefly m European Russia, Western Europe, and North America The effect was to 
convince the ruling groups of all countries that a few more atomic bombs would mean the end of 
organized society, and hence of their own power Thereafter, although no formal agreement was 
ever made or hinted at, no more bombs were dropped All three powers merely continue to 
produce atomic bombs and store them up against the decisive opportunity which they all believe 
will come sooner or later And meanwhile the art of war has remained almost stationary for thirty 
or forty years Helicopters are more used than they were formerly, bombing planes have been 
largely superseded by self-propelled projectiles, and the fragile movable battleship has given way 
to the almost unsinkable Floating Fortress, but otherwise there has been little development The 
tank, the submarine, the torpedo, the machine gun, even the rifle and the hand grenade are still in 
use And in spite of the endless slaughters reported m the Press and on the telescreens, the 
desperate battles of earlier wars, in which hundreds of thousands or even millions of men were 
often killed m a few weeks, have never been repeated 

None of the three super-states ever attempts any manoeuvre which involves the risk of serious 
defeat When any large operatioais undertaken, it is usually a surprise attack against an ally The 
strategy thatali three powers are following, or pretend to themselves that they are following, is the 
same. The plan is, by a combination of fighting, bargaining, and well-timed strokes of treachery, 
to acquire a ring of bases completely encircling one or other of the rival states, and then to sign a 



8 58 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

pact of friendship with that rival and remain on peaceful terms for so many years as to lull 
suspicion to sleep During this time rockets loaded with atomic bombs can be assembled at all the 
strategic spots, finally they will all be fired simultaneously, with effects so devastating as to make 
retaliation impossible It will then be time to sign a pact of friendship with the remaining world- 
power, in preparation for another attack This scheme, it is hardly necessary to say, is a mere 
daydream, impossible of realization Moreover, no fighting ever occurs except in the disputed 
areas round the Equator and the Pole, no invasion of enemy territory is ever undertaken This 
explains the fact that m some places the frontiers between the super-states are arbitrary Eurasia, 
for example, could easily conquer the British Isles, which are geographically part of Europe, or on 
the other hand it would be possible for Oceania to push its frontiers to the Rhine or even to the 
Vistula But this would violate the principle, followed on all sides though never formulated, of 
cultural integrity If Oceania were to conquer the areas that used once to be known as France and 
Germany, it would be necessary either to exterminate the inhabitants, a task of great physical 
difficulty, or to assimilate a population of about a hundred million people, who, so far as technical 
development goes, are roughly on the Oceanic level The problem is the same for all three super- 
states It is absolutely necessary to their structure that there should be no contact with foreigners, 
except, to a limited extent, with war prisoners and coloured slaves Even the official ally of the 
moment is always regarded with the darkest suspicion War prisoners apart, the average citizen of 
Oceania never sets eyes on a citizen of either Eurasia or Eastasia, and he is forbidden the 
knowledge of foreign languages If he were allowed contact with foreigners he would discover that 
they are -creatures similar to himself and that most of what he has been told about them is lies The 
sealed world in which he lives would be broken, and the fear, hatred, and self-righteousness on 
which his morale depends might evaporate It is therefore realized on all sides that however often 
Persia, or Egypt, or Java, or Ceylon may change hands, the mam frontiers must never be crossed 
by anything except bombs 

Under this lies a fact never mentioned aloud, but tacitlv understood and acted upon nameh 
that the conditions of life in all three superstates are very much the same In Oceania the prevailing 
philosophy is called Ingsoc, in Eurasia it is called Neo-Bolshevism, and m Eastasia it is called by a 
Chinese name usually translated as Death-Worship, but perhaps better rendered as Obliteration 
of the Self The citizen of Oceania is not allowed to know anything of the tenets of the other two 
philosophies, but he is taught to execrate them as barbarous outrages upon morality and common 
sense Actually the three philosophies are barely distinguishable, and the social systems which 
they support are not distinguishable at all Everywhere there is the same pyramidal structure, the 
same worship of a semi-dmne leader, the same economy existing by and for continuous warfare It 
follows that the three super-states not only cannot conquer one another, but would gam no 
advantage by doing so On the contrary, so long as they remain in conflict they prop one another 
up, like three sheaves of corn And, as usual, the ruling groups of all three powers are 
simultaneously aware and unaware of what they are doing. Their lives are dedicated to world 
conquest, but they also know that it is necessary that the war should continue everlastingly and 
without victory Meanwhile the fact that there is no danger of conquest makes possible the denial 
of reality which is the special feature of Ingsoc and its rival systems of thought Here it is necessary 
to repeat what has been said earlier, that by becoming continuous war has fundamentally changed 
its character 

In past ages, a war, almost by definition. Was something that sooner or later came to an end, 
usually launmistakable victory or defeat In the past, also, war was one of the mam instruments by 
which human societies were kept in touch with physical reality All rulers in all ages have tried to 
impose a false view of the world upon their followers, but they could not afford to encourage any 
illusion that tended to impair military efficiency So long as defeat meant the loss of independence, 
or some other result generally held to be undesirable, the precautions against defeat had to be 
serious- Physical facts could not be ignored In philosophy, or religion, or ethics, or politics, two 
and wo might make five, but when one was designing a gun or an aeroplane they had to make four 
Inefficient nations were always conquered sooner or later, and the struggle for efficiency was 
inimical to illusions Moreover, to be efficient it was necessary to be able to learn from the past. 
Which meant having a' fairly accurate idea of what had happened m the past Newspapers and 
history books' Were, of course, always coloured and biased, but falsification of the kind that is 
practised today Would have been impossible War was a sure safeguard of sanity, and so far as the 
ruhng^cksses were concerned it was probably the most important of all safeguards While wars 
could be- won or lost, no ruling class could be completely irresponsible 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 859 

But when war becomes literally continuous, it also ceases to be dangerous When war is 
continuous there is no such thing as military necessity Technical progress can cease and the most 
palpable facts can be denied or disregarded As we have seen, researches that could be called 
scientific are still carried out for the purposes of war, but they are essentially a kind of 
daydreaming, and their failure to show results is not important Efficiency, even military 
efficiency, is no longer needed Nothing is efficient in Oceama except the Thought Police Since 
each of the three super-states is unconquerable, each is in effect a separate universe within which 
almost any perversion of thought can be safely practised Reality only exerts its pressure through 
the needs of everyday life-the need to eat and drink, to get shelter and clothing, to avoid 
swallowing poison or stepping out of top-storey windows, and the like Between life and death, 
and between physical pleasure and physical pain, there is still a distinction, but that is all Cut off 
from contact with the outer world, and with the past, the citizen of Oceania is like a man in 
interstellar space, who has no way of knowing which direction is up and which is down The rulers 
of such a state are absolute, as the Pharaohs or the Caesars could not be They are obliged to 
prevent their followers from starving to death in numbers large enough to be inconvenient, and 
they are obliged to remain at the same low level of military technique as their rivals, but once that 
minimum is achieved, they can twist reality into whatever shape they choose 

The war, therefore, if we judge it by the standards of previous wars, is merely an imposture It is 
like the battles between certain ruminant animals whose horns are set at such an angle that they are 
incapable of hurting one another But though it is unreal it is not meaningless It eats up the 
surplus of consumable goods, and it helps to preserve the special mental atmosphere that a 
hierarchical society needs War, it will be seen, is now a purely internal affair In the past, the 
ruling groups of all countries, although they might recogmze their common interest and therefore 
limit the destructiveness of war, did fight against one another, and the victor always plundered the 
vanquished In our own day they are not fighting against one another at all The war is waged by 
each ruling group against its own subjects, and the object of the war is not to make or prevent 
conquests of territory, but to keep the structure of society intact The very word ‘war’, therefore, 
has become misleading It would probably be accurate to say that by becoming continuous war has 
ceased to exist The peculiar pressure that it exerted on human beings between the Neolithic Age 
and the early twentieth century has disappeared and been replaced by something quite different 
The effect would be much the same if the three super-states, instead of fighting one another, 
should agree to live in perpetual peace, each inviolate within its own boundaries For in that case 
each would still be a self-contained universe, freed for ever from the sobering influence of external 
danger A peace that was truly permanent would be the same as a permanent war This-although 
the vast majority of Party members understand it only in a shallower sense-is the inner meaning of 
the Party slogan War is Peace 

Winston stopped reading for a moment Somewhere in remote distance a 
rocket bomb thundered The blissful feeling of being alone with the forbidden 
book, in a room with no telescreen, had not worn off Solitude and safety were 
physical sensations, mixed up somehow with the tiredness of his body, the 
softness of the chair, the touch of the faint breeze from the window that played 
upon his cheek The book fascinated him, or more exactly it reassured him In 
a sense it told him nothing that was new, but that was part of the attraction It 
said what he would have said, if it had been possible for him to set his scattered 
thoughts m order It was the product of a mmd similar to his own, but 
enormously more powerful, more systematic, less fear-ridden The best books, 
he perceived, are those that tell you what you know already. He had just turned 
back ta Chapter I when he heard Julia’s footstep on the stair and started out of 
his chair to meet her She dumped her brown tool-bag on the floor and flung 
herself into his armsl It was more than a week since they had seen one another 

‘I’ve got the booh he said as they disentangled themselves 

‘Oh, you’ve got it> Good,’ she said without much interest, and almost 
immediately knelt down beside the oilstoveto make the coffee 



86 o Nineteen Eighty -F our 

They did not return to the subject until they had been m bed for half an 
hour The evening was just cool enough to make it worth while to pull up the 
counterpane From below came the familiar sound of singing and the scrape of 
boots on the flagstones The brawny red-armed woman whom Winston had 
seen there on his first visit was almost a fixture m the yard There seemed to be 
no hour of daylight when she was not marching to and fro between the 
washtub and the line, alternately gagging herself with clothes pegs and 
breaking forth into lusty song Julia had settled down on her side and seemed 
to be already on the point of falling asleep He reached out for the book, which 
was lying on the floor, and sat up against the bedhead 

c We must read it,’ he said ‘You too All members of the Brotherhood have 
to read it ’ 

‘You read it,’ she said with her eyes shut ‘Read it aloud That’s the best way 
Then you can explain it to me as you go ’ The clock’s hands said six, meaning 
eighteen They had three or four hours ahead of them He propped the book 
against his knees and began reading 

CHAPTER I 

IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH 

Throughout recorded time, and probably since the end of the Neolithic Age, there have been three 
kinds of people in the world, the High, the Middle, and the Low They have been subdivided m 
many ways, they have borne countless different names, and their relative numbers, as well as their 
attitude towards one another, have varied from age to age but the essential structure of society has 
never altered Even after enormous upheavals and seemingly irrevocable changes, the same 
pattern has always reasserted itself, just as a gyroscope will always return to equilibrium, however 
far it is pushed one way or the other 

‘Julia, are you awake?’ said Winston 

‘Yes, my love. I’m listening Go on It’s marvellous ’ 

He continued reading 

The aims of these three groups are entirely irreconcilable The aim of the High is to remain 
where they are The aim of the Middle is to change places with the High The aim of the Low, 
when they have an aim-for it is an abiding characteristic of the Low that they are too much 
crushed by drudgery to be more than intermittently conscious of anything outside their daily 
lives-is to abolish all distinctions and create a society m which all men shall be equal Thus 
throughout history a struggle which is the same m its main outlines recurs over and over again For 
long periods the High seem to be securely in power, but sooner or later there always comes a 
moment when they lose either their belief in themselves or their capacity to govern efficiently, or 
both They are then overthrown by the Middle, who enlist the Low on their side by pretending to 
them that they are fighting for liberty and justice As soon as they have reached their objective, the 
Middle thrust the Low bade into their old position of servitude, and themselves become the High 
Presently a new Middle group splits off from one of the other groups, or from both of them, and 
the struggle begins over again Of the three groups, only the Low are never even temporarily 
successful in achieving their aims It would be an exaggeration to say that throughout history there 
has been no progress of a material kind Even today, in a period of decline, the average human 
being is physically better off than he was a few centuries ago But no advance m wealth, no 
softening of manners, no reform or revolution has ever brought human equality a millimetre 
nearer, From the point of view of the Low, no histone change has ever meant much more than a 
change in the name of their masters 

By the late nineteenth century the recurrence of this pattern had become obvious to many 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 86 1 

observers There then rose schools of thinkers who interpreted history as a cyclical process and 
claimed to show that inequality was the unalterable law of human life This doctrine, of course, 
had always had its adherents, but in the manner m which it was now put forward there was a 
significant change In the past the need for a hierarchical form of society had been the doctrine 
specifically of the High It had been preached by kings and aristocrats and by the priests, lawyers, 
and the like who were parasitical upon them, and it had generally been softened by promises of 
compensation in an imaginary world beyond the grave The Middle, so long as it was struggling 
for power, had always made use of such terms as freedom, justice, and fraternity Now, however, 
the concept of human brotherhood began to be assailed by people who were not yet in positions of 
command, but merelv hoped to be so before long In the past the Middle had made revolutions 
under the banner of equality, and then had established a tresh tyranny as soon as the old one was 
overthrown The new Middle groups in effect proclaimed their tyranny beforehand Socialism, a 
theory which appeared in the early nineteenth century and was the last link in a chain of thought 
stretching back to the slave rebellions of antiquity, was still deeply infected by the Utopianism of 
past ages But in each variant of Socialism that appeared from about 1900 onwards the aim of 
establishing liberty and equality was more and more opehly abandoned The new movements 
which appeared in the middle years of the century, Ingsoc in Oceania, Neo-Bolshevism in Eurasia, 
Death-Worship, as it is commonly called, in Eastasia, had the conscious aim of perpetuating 
unfreedom and inequality These new movements, of course, grew out of the old ones and tended 
to keep their names and pay hp-service to their ideology But the purpose of all of them was to 
arrest progress and freeze history at a chosen moment The familiar pendulum swing was to 
happen once more, and then stop As usual, the High were to be turned out by the Middle, who 
would then become the High, but this time, by conscious strategy, the High would be able to 
maintain their position permanently 

The new doctrines arose partly because of the accumulation of historical knowledge, and the 
growth of the historical sense, which had hardly existed before the nineteenth century The 
cyclical movement of history was now intelligible, or appeared to be so, and if it was intelligible, 
then it was alterable But the principal, underlying cause was that, as early as the beginning of the 
twentieth century, human equality had become technically possible It was still true that men were 
not equal in their native talents and that functions had to be specialized in ways that favoured some 
individuals against others, but there was no longer any real need for class distinctions or for large 
differences of wealth In earlier ages, class distinctions had been not only inevitable but desirable 
Inequality was the price of civilization With the development of machine production, however, 
the case was altered Even if it was still necessary for human beings to do different kinds of work, it 
was no longer necessary for them to live at different social or economic levels Therefore, from the 
point of view of the new groups who were on the point of seizing power, human equality was no 
longer an ideal to be striven after, but a danger to be averted In more primitive ages, when a just 
and peaceful society was in fact not possible, it had been fairly easy to believe it The idea of an 
earthly paradise in which men should live together in a state of brotherhood, without laws and 
without brute labour, had haunted the human imagination for thousands of years And this vision 
had had a certain hold even on the group who actually profited by each historical change The heirs 
of the French, English, and American revolutions had partly believed m their own phrases about 
the rights of man, freedom of speech, equality before the law, and the like, and have even allowed 
their conduct to be influenced by them to some extent But by the fourth decade of the twentieth 
century all the mam currents of political thought were authoritarian The earthly paradise had 
been discredited at exactly the moment when it became realizable Every new political theory, by 
whatever name it called itself, led back to hierarchy and regimentation And m the general 
hardening of outlook that set in round about 1930, practices which had been long abandoned, m 
some cases for hundreds of years-impnsonment without trial, the use of war prisoners as slaves, 
public executions, torture to extract confessions, the use of hostages, and the deportation of whole 
populations-not only became common again, but were tolerated and even defended by people 
who considered themselves enlightened and progressive 

It was only after a decade of national wars, civil wars, revolutions, and counter-revolutions in all 
parts of the world that Ingsoc and its rivals emerged as fully worked-out political theories But 
they had been foreshadowed by the various systems, generally called totalitarian, which had 
appeared earlier m the century, and the mam outlines of the world which would emerge from the 
prevailing chaos had long been obvious What kind of people would control this world had been 
equally obvious. The new aristocracy was made up for the most part of bureaucrats, scientists. 



862 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

technicians, trade-union organizers, publicity experts, sociologists, teachers, journalists, and 
professional politicians These people, whose origins lay m the salaried middle class and the upper 
grades of the working class, had been shaped and brought together by the barren world of 
monopoly industry and centralized government As compared with their opposite numbers m past 
ages, they were less avaricious, less tempted by luxury, hungrier for pure power, and, above all, 
more conscious of what they were doing and more intent on crushing opposition This last 
difference was cardinal By comparison with that existing today, all the tyrannies of the past were 
half-hearted and inefficient The ruling groups were always infected to some extent by liberal 
ideas, and were content to leave loose ends everywhere, to regard only the overt act and to be 
uninterested m what their subjects were thinking Even the Catholic Church of the Middle Ages 
was tolerant by modern standards Part of the reason for this was that m the past no government 
had the power to keep its citizens under constant surveillance The invention of print, however, 
made it easier to manipulate public opinion, and the film and the radio carried the process further 
With the development of television, and the technical advance which made it possible to receive 
and transmit simultaneously on the same instrument, private life came to an end Every citizen, or 
at least every citizen important enough to be worth watching, could be kept for twenty-four hours 
a day under the eyes of the police and in the sound of official propaganda, with all other channels of 
communication closed The possibility of enforcing not only complete obedience to the will of the 
State, but complete uniformity of opmion on all subjects, now existed for the first time 

After the revolutionary period of the ’fifties and ’sixties, society regrouped itself, as always, into 
High, Middle, and Low But the new High group, unlike all its forerunners, did not act upon 
instinct but knew what was needed to safeguard its position It had long been realized that the only 
secure basis for oligarchy is collectivism Wealth and privilege are most easily defended when they 
are possessed jointly The so-called ‘abolition of private property’ which took place in the middle 
years of the century meant, in effect, the concentration of property m far fewer hands than before 
but with this difference, that the new owners were a group instead of a mass of individuals 
Individually, no member of the Party owns anything, except petty personal belongings 
Collectively, the Party owns everything in Oceania, because it controls everything, and disposes of 
the products as it thinks fit In the years following the Revolution it was able to step into this 
commanding position almost unopposed, because the whole process was represented as an act of 
collectivization It had always been assumed that if the capitalist class were expropriated, 
Socialism must follow and unquestionably the capitalists had been expropriated Factories, 
mines, land, houses, transport-everything had been taken away from them and since these things 
were no longer private property, it followed that they must be public property Ingsoc, which grew 
out of the earlier Socialist movement and inherited its phraseology, has in fact carried out the mam 
item m the Socialist programme, with the result, foreseen and intended beforehand, that economic 
inequality has been made permanent 

But the problems of perpetuating a hierarchical society go deeper than this There are only four 
ways in which a ruling group can fall from power Either it is conquered from without, or it 
governs so inefficiently that the masses are stirred to revolt, or it allows a strong and discontented 
Middle group to come into being, or it loses its own self-confidence and willingness to govern 
These causes do not operate singly, and as a rule all four of them are present in some degree A 
ruling class which could guard against all of them would remain in power permanently Ultimately 
the determining factor is the mental attitude of the ruling class itself 

After the middle of the present century, the first danger had m reality disappeared Each of the 
three powers which now divide the world is in fact unconquerable, and could only become 
conquerable through slow demographic changes which a government with wide powers can easily 
avert The second danger, also, is only a theoretical one The masses never revolt of their own 
accord, and they never revolt merely because they are oppressed Indeed, so long as they are not 
permitted to have standards of comparison, they never even become aware that they are oppressed 
The recurrent economic arises of past times were totally unnecessary and are not now permitted to 
happen, but other and equally large dislocations can and do happen without having political 
results, because there is no way m which discontent can become articulate As for the problem of 
over-production, 'VHuch has been latent in our society since the development of machine 
fO#mtpe,jt®sqlved by the device of continuous warfare (see Chapter III), which is also useful in 
keiung up 'public morale to the necessary pitch From the point of view of our present rulers, 
pic only genuine dangers are the splitting-off of a new group of able, under-employed, 
people, and the growth of liberalism and scepticism m their own ranks The 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 863 

problem, that is to say, is educational It is a problem of continuously moulding the consciousness 
both of the directing group and of the larger executive group that lies immediately below it The 
consciousness of the masses needs only to be influenced in a negative way 

Given this background, one could infer, if one did not know it already, the general structure of 
Oceanic society At the apex of the pyramid comes Big Brother Big Brother is infallible and all- 
powerful Every success, every achievement, every victory, every scientific discovery, all 
knowledge, all wisdom, all happiness, all virtue, are held to issue directly from his leadership and 
inspiration Nobody has ever seen Big Brother He is a face on the hoardings, a voice on the 
telescreen We may be reasonably sure that he will never die, and there is already considerable 
uncertainty as to when he was born Big Brother is the guise in which the Party chooses to exhibit 
itself to the world His function is to act as a focusing point for love, fear, and reverence, emotions 
which are more easily felt towards an individual than towards an organization Below Big Brother 
comes the Inner Party, its numbers limited to six millions, or something less than 2 per cent of the 
population of Oceania Below the Inner Party comes the Outer Party, which, if the Inner Party is 
described as the brain of the State, may be justly likened to the hands Below that come the dumb 
masses whom we habitually refer to as ‘the proles’, numbering perhaps 85 per cent of the 
population In the terms of our earlier classification, the proles are the Low for the slave 
population of the equatorial lands, who pass constantly from conqueror to conqueror, are not a 
permanent or necessary part of the structure 

In principle, membership of these three groups is not hereditary The child of Inner Party 
parents is m theory not born into the Inner Party Admission to either branch of the Party is by 
examination, taken at the age of sixteen Nor is there any racial discrimination, or any marked 
domination of one province by another Jews, Negroes, South Americans of pure Indian blood are 
to be found m the highest ranks of the Party, and the administrators of any area are always drawn 
from the inhabitants of that area In no part of Oceania do the inhabitants have the feeling that they 
are a colonial population ruled from a distant capital Oceania has no capital, and its titular head is 
a person whose whereabouts nobody knows Except that English is its chief lingua franca and 
Newspeak its official language, it is not centralized in any way Its rulers are not held together by 
blood-ties but by adherence to a common doctrine It is true that our society is stratified, and very 
rigidly stratified, on what at first sight appear to be hereditary lines There is far less to-and-fro 
movement between the different groups than happened under capitalism or even m the pre- 
industrial age Between the two branches of the Party there is a certain amount of interchange, but 
only so much as will ensure that weaklings are excluded from the Inner Party and that ambitious 
members of the Outer Party are made harmless by allowing them to rise Proletarians, in practice, 
are not allowed to graduate into the Party The most gifted among them, who might possibly 
become nuclei of discontent, aie simply marked down by the Thought Police and eliminated But 
this state of affairs is not necessarily permanent, nor is it a matter of principle The Party is not a 
class in the old sense of the word It does not aim at transmitting power to its own children, as 
such, and if there were no other way of keeping the ablest people at the top, it would be perfectly 
prepared to recruit an entire new generation from the ranks of the proletariat In the crucial years, 
the fact that the Party was not a hereditary body did a great deal to neutralize opposition The 
older kind of Socialist, who had been trained to fight against something called ‘class privilege’, 
assumed that what is not hereditary cannot be permanent He did not see that the continuity of an 
oligarchy need not be physical, nor did he pause to reflect that hereditary aristocracies have always 
been shortlived, whereas adoptive organizations such as the Catholic Church have sometimes 
lasted for hundreds of thousands of years The essence of oligarchical rule is not father-to-son 
inheritance, but the persistence of a certain world-view and a certain way of life, imposed by the 
dead upon the living A ruling group is a ruling group so long as it can nominate its successors The 
Party is not concerned with perpetuating its blood but with perpetuating itself Who wields power 
is not important, provided that the hierarchical structure remains always the same 

All the beliefs, habits, tastes, emotions, mental attitudes that characterize our time are really 
designed to sustain the mystique of the Party and prevent the true nature of present-day society 
from bemg perceived, Physical rebellion, or any preliminary move towards rebellion, is at present 
not possible From the proletarians nothing is to be feared Left to themselves, they will continue 
from generation to generation and from century to century, working, breeding, and dying, not 
only without any impulse to rebel, but without the power of grasping that the world could be other 
than it is They could only become dangerous if the advance of industrial technique made it 
necessary to educate them more highly, but, since military and commercial rivalry are no longer 



864 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

important, the level of popular education is actually declining What opinions the masses hold, or 
do not hold, is looked on as a matter of indifference They can be granted intellectual liberty 
because they have no intellect In a Party member, on the other hand, not even the smallest 
deviation of opinion on the most unimportant subject can be tolerated 

A Party member lives from birth to death under the eye of the Thought Police Even when he is 
alone he can never be sure that he is alone Wherever he may be, asleep or awake, working or 
resting, in his bath or in bed, he can be inspected without warning and without knowing that he is 
being inspected Nothing that he does is indifferent His friendships, his relaxations, his behaviour 
towards his wife and children, the expression of his face when he is alone, the words he mutters m 
sleep, even the characteristic movements of his body, are all jealously scrutinized Not only any 
actual misdemeanour, but any eccentricity, however small, any change of habits, any nervous 
mannerism that could possibly be the symptom of an inner struggle, is certain to be detected He 
has no freedom of choice m any direction whatever On the other hand his actions are not regulated 
by law or by any clearly formulated code of behaviour In Oceania there is no law Thoughts and 
actions which, when detected, mean certain death are not formally forbidden, and the endless 
purges, arrests, tortures, imprisonments, and vaporizations are not inflicted as punishment for 
crimes which have actually been committed, but are merely the wiping-out of persons who might 
perhaps commit a crime at some time in the future A Party member is required to have not only 
the right opinions, but the right instincts Many of the beliefs and attitudes demanded of him are 
never plainly stated, and could not be stated without laying bare the contradictions inherent m 
Ingsoc If he is a person naturally orthodox (in Newspeak a goodthinker ), he will m all 
circumstances know, without taking thought, what is the true belief or the desirable emotion But 
in any case an elaborate mental training, undergone in childhood and grouping itself round the 
Newspeak words cnmestop blackwhite, and doublethink, makes him unwilling and unable to think 
too deeply on any subject whatever 

A Party member is expected to have no private emotions and no respites from enthusiasm He is 
supposed to live in a continuous frenzy of hatred of foreign enemies and internal traitors, triumph 
over victories, and self-abasement before the power and wisdom of the Party The discontents 
produced by his bare, unsatisfying life are deliberately turned outwards and dissipated by such 
devices as the Two Minutes Hate, and the speculations which might possibly induce a sceptical or 
rebellious attitude are killed in advance by his early acquired inner discipline The first and 
simplest stage in the discipline, which can be taught even to young children, is called, in 
Newspeak, crimestop Cnmestop means the faculty of stopping short, as though by instinct, at the 
threshold of any dangerous thought It includes the power of not grasping analogies, of failing to 
perceive logical errors, of misunderstanding the simplest arguments if they are mimical to Ingsoc, 
and of being bored or repelled by any tram of thought which is capable of leading in a heretical 
direction Cnmestop , in short, means protective stupidity But stupidity is not enough On the 
contrary, orthodoxy m the full sense demands a control over one’s own mental processes as 
complete as that of a contortionist over his body Oceanic society rests ultimately on the belief that 
Big Brother is omnipotent and that the Party is infallible But since m reality Big Brother is not 
omnipotent and the Party is not infallible, there is need for an unwearying, moment-to-moment 
flexibility in the treatment of facts The key-word here is blackwhite Like so many Newspeak 
words, this word has two mutually contradictory meanings Applied to an opponent, it means the 
habit of impudently claiming that black is white, in contradiction of the plain facts Applied to a 
Party member, it means a loyal willingness to say that black is white when Party discipline 
demands this But it means also the ability to believe that black is white, and more, to know that 
black is white, and to forget that one has ever believed the contrary This demands a continuous 
alteration of the past, made possible bythe system of thought which really embraces all the rest, 
and which is known in Newspeak as doublethink 

The alteration of the past is necessary for two reasons, one of which is subsidiary and, so to 
speak, precautionary* The subsidiary reason is that the Party member, like the proletarian, 
tolerates present-day conditions partly because he has no standards of comparison He must be cut 
off from fhe past* just as he must be cut off from foreign countries, because it is necessary for him 
to believe that he is belter off than his ancestors and that the average level of material comfort is 
.opnstpJ^y riSing; But by far the more important reason for the readjustment of the past is the need 
tb Safeguard >the infallibility of the Party It is not merely that speeches, statistics, and records of 
ovm^ kind must be constantly brought up to date in order to show that the predictions of the Party 
were m all eases right, It is also that no change m doctrine or m political alignment can ever be 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 86 5 

admitted For to change one’s mind, or even one’s policy, is a confession of weakness If, for 
example, Eurasia or Eastasia (whichever it may be) is the enemy today, then that country must 
always have been the enemy And if the facts say otherwise then the facts must be altered Thus 
history is continuously rewritten This day-to-day falsification of the past, carried out by the 
Ministry of Truth, is as necessary to the stability of the regime as the work of repression and 
espionage carried out by the Ministry of Love 

The mutability of the past is the central tenet of Ingsoc Past events, it is argued have no 
objective existence, but survive only in written records and in human memones The past is 
whatever the records and the memones agree upon And since the Party is m full control of all 
records and in equally full control of the minds of its members, it follows that the past is whatever 
the Party chooses to make it It also follows that though the past is alterable, it never has been 
altered in any specific instance For when it has been re-created m whatever shape is needed at the 
moment, then this new version is the past, and no different past can ever have existed This holds 
good even when, as often happens, the same event has to be altered out of recognition several times 
in the course of a year At all times the Party is in possession of absolute truth, and clearly the 
absolute can never have been different from what it is now It will be seen that the control of the 
past depends above all on the training of memory To make sure that all written records agree with 
the orthodoxy of the moment is merely a mechanical act But it is also necessary to remember that 
events happened in the desired manner And if it is necessary to rearrange one’s memones or to 
tamper with written records, then it is necessary to forget that one had done so The trick of doing 
this can be learned like any other mental technique It is learned by the majority of Party members, 
and certainly by all who are intelligent as well as orthodox In Oldspeak it is called, quite frankly, 
‘reality control’ In Newspeak it is called doublethink, though doublethink comprises much else as 
well 

Doublethink means the power of holding two contradictory beliefs m one’s mind simultaneously, 
and accepting both of them The Party intellectual knows m which direction his memones must be 
altered, he therefore knows that he is playing tricks with reality, but by the exercise of doublethink 
he also satisfies himself that reality is not violated The process has to be conscious, or it would not 
be carried out with sufficient precision, but it also has to be unconscious, or it would bring with it a 
feeling of falsity and hence of guilt Doublethink lies at the very heart of Ingsoc, since the essential 
act of the Party is to use conscious deception while retaimng the firmness of purpose that goes with 
complete honesty To tell deliberate lies while genuinely believing in them, to forget any fact that 
has become inconvenient, and then, when it becomes necessary again, to draw it back from 
oblivion for just so long as it is needed, to deny the existence of objecttve reality and all the while to 
take account of the reality which one demes-all this is indispensably necessary Evfen in using the 
word doublethink it is necessary to exercise doublethink For by using the word one admits that one 
is tampering with reality, by a fresh act of doublethink one erases this knowledge and so on 
indefinitely, with the he always one leap ahead of the truth Ultimately it is by means of doublethink 
that the Party has been able-and may, for all we know, continue to be able for thousands of 
years-to arrest the course of history 

All past oligarchies have fallen from power either because they ossified or because they grew 
soft Either they became stupid and arrogant, failed to adjust themselves to changing 
circumstances, and were overthrown, or they became hberal and cowardly, made concessions 
when they should have used force, and once again were overthrown They fell, that is to say, either 
through consciousness or through unconsciousness It is the achievement of the Party to have 
produced a system of thought in which both conditions can exist simultaneously And upon no 
other intellectual basis could the dominion of the Party be made permanent If one is to rule, and 
to continue ruling, one must be able to dislocate the sense of reality For the secret of rulership is to 
combine a belief in one’s own infallibility with the power to learn from past mistakes 

It need hardly be said that the subtlest practitioners of doublethink are those who invented 
doublethink and know that it is a vast system of mental cheating In our society, those who have the 
best knowledge of what is happening are also those who are furthest from seeing the world as it is 
In general, the greater the understanding, the greater the delusion the more intelligent, the less 
sane One clear illustration of this is the fact that war hysteria increases in intensity as one rises in 
the social scale Those whose attitude towards the war is most nearly rational are the subject 
peoples of the disputed territories To these people the war is simply a continuous calamity which 
sweeps to and fro over theixbodies hkea tidal wave Which slide is warning is a matter of complete 
indifference to them Th^y atp awarejtbat a change off pverlordship means simply that they wifli be 



866 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

doing the same work as before for new masters who treat them m the same manner as the old ones 
The slightly more favoured workers whom we call ‘the proles’ are only intermittently conscious of 
the war When it is necessary they can be prodded into frenzies of fear and hatred, but when left to 
themselves they are capable of forgetting for long periods that the war is happening It is m the 
ranks ot the Party, and above all of the Inner Party, that the true war enthusiasm is found World- 
conquest is believed m most firmly by those who know it to be impossible This peculiar linking- 
together of opposites-knowledge with ignorance, cynicism with fanaticism-is one of the chief 
distinguishing marks of Oceanic society The official ideology abounds with contradictions even 
when there is no practical reason for them Thus, the Party rejects and vilifies every principle for 
which the Socialist movement originally stood, and it chooses to do this in the name of Socialism 
It preaches a contempt for the working class unexampled for centuries past, and it dresses its 
members m a uniform which was at one time peculiar to manual workers and was adopted for that 
reason It systematically undermines the solidarity of the family, and it calls its leader by a name 
which is a direct appeal to the sentiment of family loyalty Even the names of the four Ministries by 
which we are governed exhibit a sort of impudence in their deliberate reversal of the facts The 
Ministry of Peace concerns itself with war, the Ministry of Truth with lies, the Ministry of Love 
with torture, and the Ministry of Plenty with starvation These contradictions are not accidental, 
nor do they result from ordinary hypocrisy they are deliberate exercises in doublethink For it is 
only by reconciling contradictions that power can be retained indefinitely In no other way could 
the ancient cycle be broken If human equality is to be for ever averted-if the High, as we have 
called them, are to keep their places permanently-then the prevailing mental condition must be 
controlled insanity 

But there is one question which until this moment we have almost ignored It is why should 
human equality be averted’ Supposing that the mechanics of the process have been nghtly 
described, what is the motive for this huge, accurately planned effort to freeze history at a 
particular moment of time’ 

Here we reach the central secret As we have seen, the mystique of the Party, and above all of the 
Inner Party, depends upon doublethink But deeper than this lies the original motive, the never- 
questioned instinct that first led to the seizure of power and brought doublethink, the Thought 
Police, continuous warfare, and all the other necessary paraphernalia into existence afterwards 
This motive really consists 


Winston became aware of silence, as one becomes aware of a new sound. It 
seemed to him that Julia had been very still for some time past She was lying 
on her side, naked from the waist upwards, with her cheek pillowed on her 
hand and one dark lock tumbling across her eyes Her breast rose and fell 
slowly and regularly 
‘Julia 5 
No answer 

‘Julia, are you awake?’ 

No answer She was asleep He shut the book, put it carefully on the floor, 
lay down, and pulled the coverlet over both of them 
He had still, he reflected, not learned the ultimate secret He understood 
how, he did not understand why Chapter I, like Chapter III, had not actually 
told him anything that he did not know, it had merely systematized the 
knowledge that he possessed already But after reading it he knew better than 
beforethat he was not mad Being in a minority, even a minority of one, did not 
make you mad. There was truth and there was untruth, and if you clung to the 
trUfft even against the whole world, you were not mad A yellow beam from the 
Sinking sun slanted in through the window and fell across the pillow He shut 
his eyes. The sun on his face and the girl’s smooth body touching his own gave 
him a Strong, sleepy, confident feeling He was safe, everything was all right 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 867 

He fell asleep murmuring ‘Sanity is not statistical,’ with the feehng that this 
remark contained m it a profound wisdom 


When he woke it was with the sensation ot Having slept for a long time, but a 
glance at the old-fashioned clock told him that it was only twenty-thirty He 
lay dozing for a little while, then the usual deep-lunged singing struck up from 
the yard below 

‘It was only an ’opeless fancy, 

It passed like an Ipril dye, 

But a look an’ a word an’ the dreams they stirred 
They ’ave stolen my ’eart awye 1 ’ 

The drivelling song seemed to have kept its popularity You still heard it all 
over the place It had outlived the Hate Song Julia woke at the sound, 
stretched herself luxuriously, and got out of bed 

‘I’m hungry,’ she said ‘Let’s make some more coffee Damn 1 The stove’s 
gone out and the water’s cold ’ She picked the stove up and shook it ‘There’s 
no oil in it ’ 

‘We can get some from old Charrington, I expect ’ 

‘The funny thing is I made sure it was full I’m going to put my clothes on,’ 
she added ‘It seems to have got colder ’ 

Winston also got up and dressed himself The indefatigable voice sang on 

‘They sye that time ’eals all things. 

They sye you can always forget, 

But the smiles an’ the tears acrorss the years 
They twist my ’eart-stnngs yeti’ 

As he fastened the belt of his overalls he strolled across to the window The 
sun must have gone down behind the houses, it was not shining into the yard 
any longer The flagstones were wet as though they had just been washed, and 
he had the feeling that the sky had been washed too, so fresh and pale was the 
blue between the chimney-pots Tirelessly the woman marched to and fro, 
corking and uncorking herself, singing and falling silent, and pegging out more 
diapers, and more and yet more He wondered whether she took m washing for 
a living, or was merely the slave of twenty or thirty grand-children Julia had 
come across to his side, together they gazed down with a sort of fascination at 
the sturdy figure below As he looked at the woman in her characteristic 
attitude, her thick arms reaching up for the line, her powerful mare-like 
buttocks protruded, it struck him for the first time that she was beautiful It 
had never before occurred to him that the body of a woman of fifty, blown up 
to monstrous dimensions by childbearing, then hardened, roughened by work 
till it was coarse m the gram like an over-ripe turnip, could be beautiful But it 
was so, and after all, he thought, why not? The solid, contourless body, like a 
block of granite, and the rasping red skin, bore the same relation to the body of 
a girl as the rose-hip to the rose Why should the fruit be held inferior to the 
flower? » 



868 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

‘She’s beautiful,’ he murmured 

‘She’s a metre across the hips, easily,’ said Julia 

‘That is her style of beauty,’ said Winston 

He held Julia’s supple waist easily encircled by his arm From the hip to the 
knee her flank was against his Out of their bodies no child would ever come 
That was the one thing they could never do Only by word of mouth, from 
mind to mind, could they pass on the secret The woman down there had no 
mind, she had only strong arms, a warm heart, and a fertile belly He wondered 
how many children she had given birth to It might easily be fifteen She had 
had her momentary flowering, a year, perhaps, of wild-rose beauty, and then 
she had suddenly swollen like a fertilized fruit and grown hard and red and 
coarse, and then her life had been laundering, scrubbing, darning, cooking, 
sweeping, polishing, mending, scrubbing, laundering, first for children, then 
for grand-children, over thirty unbroken years At the end of it she was still 
singing The mystical reverence that he felt for her was somehow mixed up 
with the aspect of the pale, cloudless sky, stretching away behind the chimney- 
pots into interminable distance It was curious to think that the sky was the 
same for everybody, m Eurasia or Eastasia as well as here And the people 
under the sky were also very much the same-everywhere, all over the world, 
hundreds of thousands of millions of people just like this, people ignorant of 
one another’s existence, held apart by walls of hatred and lies, and yet almost 
exactly the same-people who had never learned to think but who were storing 
up in their hearts and bellies and muscles the power that would one day 
overturn the world If there was hope , it lay in the proles 1 Without having read 
to the end of the book , he knew that that must be Goldstein’s final message The 
future belonged to the proles And could he be sure that when their time came 
the world they constructed would not be just as alien to him, Winston Smith, 
as the world of the Party? Yes, because at the least it would be a world of sanity 
Where there is equality there can be sanity Sooner of later it would happen, 
strength would change into consciousness The proles were immortal, you 
could not doubt it when you looked at that valiant figure m the yard In the end 
their awakening would come And until that happened, though it might be a 
thousand years, they would stay alive against all the odds, like birds, passing 
on from body to body the vitality which the Party did not share and could not 
kill 

‘Do you remember,’ he said, ‘the thrush that sang to us, that first day, at the 
edge of the wood?’ 

‘He wasn’t singing to us,’ said Julia ‘He was singing to please himself Not 
even that. He was just singing ’ 

The birds sang, the proles sang, the Party did not sing All round the world, 
m London and New York, in Africa and Brazil, and m the mysterious, 
forbidden lands beyond the frontiers, m the streets of Paris and Berlin, m the 
villages of the endless Russian plain, m the bazaars of China and 
J apan-everwhere stood the same solid unconquerable figure, made monstrous 
by work and child bearing, toiling from birth to death and still singing Out of 
those mighty loins a race of conscious beings must one day come You were the 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 869 

dead, theirs was the future But you could share m that future if you kept alive 
the mind as they kept alive the body, and passed on the secret doctrine that two 
plus two make four 

‘We are the dead,’ he said 

‘We are the dead,’ echoed Julia dutifully 

‘You are the dead/ said an iron voice behind them 

They sprang apart Winston’s entrails seemed to have turned into ice He 
could see the white all round the irises of Julia’s eyes Her face had turned a 
milky yellow The smear of rouge that was still on each cheekbone stood out 
sharply, almost as though unconnected with the skin beneath 
‘You are the dead,’ repeated the iron voice 
‘It was behind the picture,’ breathed Julia 

‘It was behind the picture/ said the voice ‘Remain exactly where you are 
Make no movement until you are ordered * 

It was starting, it was starting at last 1 They could do nothing except stand 
gazing into one another’s eyes To run for life, to get out of the house before it 
was too late-no such thought occurred to them Unthinkable to disobey the 
iron voice from the wall There was a snap as though a catch had been turned 
back, and a crash of breaking glass The picture had fallen to the floor, 
uncovering the telescreen behind it 
‘Now they can see us/ said Julia 

‘Now we can see you/ said the voice ‘Stand out m the middle of the room 
Stand back to back Clasp your hands behind your heads Do not touch one 
another ’ 

They were not touching, but it seemed to him that he could feel Julia’s body 
shaking Or perhaps it was merely the shaking of his own He could just stop 
his teeth from chattering, but his knees were beyond his control There was a 
sound of trampling boots below, inside the house and outside The yard 
seemed to be full of men Something was being dragged across the stones The 
woman’s singing had stopped abruptly There was a long, rolling, clang, as 
though the washtub had been flung across the yard, and then a confusion of 
angry shouts which ended in a yell of pain 
‘The house is surrounded/ said Winston 
‘The house is surrounded/ said the voice 

He heard Julia snap her teeth together ‘I suppose we may as well say good- 
bye/ she said 

‘You may as well say good-bye/ said the voice And then another quite 
different voice, a thm, cultivated voice which Winston had the impression of 
having heard before, struck in ‘And by the way, while we are on the subject, 
“Here comes a candle to light you to bed, here comes a chopper to chop off 
your head”*’ 

Something crashed on to the bed behind Winston’s back The head of a 
ladder had been thrust through the window and had burst in the frames Some 
one was climbing through the window There was a stampede of boots up the 
stairs The room was full of solid men in black uniforms, with iron-shod boots 
on their feet and truncheons in their hands 



8 yo Nineteen Eighty-Four 

Winston was not trembling any longer Even his eyes he barely moved One 
thing alone mattered to keep still, to keep still and not give them an excuse to 
hit you 1 A man with a smooth prize-fighter’s jowl m which the mouth was only 
a slit paused opposite him balancing his truncheon meditatively between 
thumb and forefinger Winston met his eyes The feeling of nakedness, with 
one’s hands behind one’s head and one’s face and body all exposed, was almost 
unbearable The man protruded the tip of a white tongue, licked the place 
where his lips should have been, and then passed on There was another crash 
Someone had picked up the glass paperweight from the table and smashed it to 
pieces on the hearth-stone 

The fragment of coral, a tiny crinkle of pink like a sugar rosebud from a cake, 
rolled across the mat How small, thought Winston, how small it always was 1 
There was a gasp and a thump behind him, and he received a violent kick on 
the ankle which nearly flung him off his balance One of the men had smashed 
his fist into Julia’s solar plexus, doubling her up like a pocket ruler She was 
thrashing about on the floor, fighting for breath Winston dared not turn his 
head even by a millimetre, but sometimes her livid, gasping face came within 
the angle of his vision Even in his terror it was as though he could feel the pain 
in his own body, the deadly pam which nevertheless was less urgent than the 
struggle to get back her breath He knew what it was like the terrible, 
agomzmg pain which was there all the while but could not be suffered yet, 
because before all else it was necessary to be able to breathe Then two of the 
men hoisted her up by knees and shoulders, and carried her out of the room 
like a sack Winston had a glimpse of her face, upside down, yellow and 
contorted, with the eyes shut, and still with a smear of rouge on either cheek, 
and that was the last he saw of her 

He stood dead still. No one had hit him yet Thoughts which came of their 
own accord but seemed totally uninteresting began to flit through his mind He 
wondered whether they had got Mr Charrington He wondered what they had 
done to the woman in the yard He noticed that he badly wanted to urinate, and 
felt a faint surprise, because he had done so only two or three hours ago He 
noticed that the clock on the mantelpiece said nine, meaning twenty-one But 
the light seemed too strong Would not the light be fading at twenty-one hours 
on an August evening'* He wondered whether after all he and Julia had 
mistaken the time-had slept the clock round and thought it was twenty-thirty 
when really it was nought eight-thirty on the following mormng But he did 
not pursue the thought further. It was not interesting 

There was another, lighter step m the passage Mr Charrington came into 
the room The demeanour of the black-uniformed men suddenly became more 
subdued Something had also changed m Mr Charrmgton’s appearance His 
eye fell on the fragments of the glass paperweight 
- ‘Pick up those pieces,’ he said sharply 

s A man stooped to obey. The Cockney accent had disappeared: Winston 
suddenly realized whose voice it was that he had heard a few moments ago on 
the telescreen Mr Charrington was still wearing his old velvet jacket, but his 
hair, Which had been almost white, had turned black Also he was not wearing 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 871 

his spectacles He gave Winston a single sharp glance, as though verifying his 
identity, and then paid no more attention to him He was still recognizable, but 
he was not the same person any longer His body had straightened, and seemed 
to have grown bigger His face had undergone only tiny changes that had 
nevertheless worked a complete transformation The black eyebrows were less 
bushy, the wrinkles were gone, the whole lines of the face seemed to have 
altered, even the nose seemed shorter It was the alert, cold face of a man of 
about five-and-thirty It occurred to Winston that for the first time in his life 
he was looking, with knowledge, at a member of the Thought Police 



PART III 


i 


He did not know where he was Presumably he was in the Ministry of Love, 
but there was no way of making certain 
He was in a high-ceilmged windowless cell with walls of glittering white 
porcelain Concealed lamps flooded it with cold light, and there was a low, 
steady humming sound which he supposed had something to do with the air 
supply A bench, or shelf, just wide enough to sit on ran round the wall, broken 
only by the door and, at the end opposite the door, a lavatory pan with no 
wooden seat There were four telescreens, one in each wall 

There was a dull aching in his belly It had been there ever since they had 
bundled him into the closed van and driven him away But he was also hungry, 
with a gnawing, unwholesome kind of hunger It might be twenty-four hours 
since he had eaten, it might be thirty-six He still did not know, probably never 
would know, whether it had been morning or evening when they arrested him 
Since he was arrested he had not been fed 
He sat as still as he could on the narrow bench, with his hands crossed on his 
knees He had already learned to sit still If you made unexpected movements 
they yelled at you from the telescreen But the craving for food was growing 
upon him What he longed for above all was a piece of bread He had an idea 
that there were a few breadcrumbs m the pocket of his overalls It was even 
possible-he thought this because from time to time something seemed to tickle 
his leg-that there might be a sizeable bit of crust there In the end the 
temptation to find out overcame his fear, he slipped a hand into his pocket 
‘ Smith 1 * yelled a yoice from the telescreen, ‘6079 Smith W 1 Hands out of 
pockets m the cells ' ’ 

He sat stall again, his hands crossed on his knee Before being brought here 
he had been taken to another place which must have been an ordinary prison or 
a temporary lock-up used by the patrols. He did not know how long he had 
been there; sqme hours at any rate; with no clocks and no daylight it was hard 
to gauge the time It was a noisy, evil-smellmg place They had put him into a 
cell miliar to the one he was now m, but filthily dirty and at all times crowded 
hy ten or fifteen people The majority of them were common criminals, but 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 873 

there were a few political prisoners among them He had sat silent against the 
wall, jostled by dirty bodies, too preoccupied by fear and the pam in his belly 
to take much interest in his surroundings, but still noticing the astomshing 
difference m demeanour between the Party prisoners and the others The 
Party prisoners were always silent and terrified, but the ordinary criminals 
seemed to care nothing for anybody They yelled insults at the guards, fought 
back fiercely when their belongings were impounded, wrote obscene words on 
the floor, ate smuggled food which they produced from mysterious hiding- 
places m their clothes, and even shouted down the telescreen when it tried to 
restore order On the other hand some of them seemed to be on good terms 
with the guards, called them by nicknames, and tried to wheedle cigarettes 
through the spyhole m the door The guards, too, treated the common 
criminals with a certain forbearance, even when they had to handle them 
roughly There was much talk about forced-labour camps to which most of the 
prisoners expected to be sent It was ‘all right 5 m the camps, he gathered, so 
long as you had good contacts and knew the ropes There was bribery, 
favouritism, and racketeering of every kind, there was homosexuality and 
prostitution, there was even illicit alcohol distilled from potatoes The 
positions of trust were given only to the common criminals, especially the 
gangsters and the murderers, who formed a sort of aristocracy All the dirty 
jobs were done by the politicals 

There was a constant come-and-go of prisoners of every description drug- 
peddlers, thieves, bandits, black-marketeers, drunks, prostitutes Some of the 
drunks were so violent that the other prisoners had to combine to suppress 
them An enormous wreck of a woman, aged about sixty, with great tumbling 
breasts and thick coils of white hair which had come down in her struggles, was 
carried in, kicking and shouting, by four guards, who had hold of her one at 
each corner They wrenched off the boots with which she had been trying to 
kick them, and dumped her down across Winston’s lap, almost breaking his 
thigh-bones The woman hoisted herself upright and followed them out with a 
yell of ‘F — bastards 1 ’ Then, noticing that she was sitting on some thing 
uneven, she slid off Winston’s knees on to the bench 

‘Beg pardon, dearie,’ she said ‘I wouldn’t ’a sat on you, only the buggers put 
me there They dono ’ow to treat a lady, do they?’ She paused, patted her 
breast, and belched ‘Pardon,’ she said, ‘I ain’t meself, quite ’ 

She leant forward and vomited copiously on the floor 
‘Thass better,’ she said, leaning back with closed eyes ‘Never keep it down, 
thass what I say Get it up while it’s fresh on your stomach, like ’ 

She revived, turned to have another look at Winston, and seemed 
immediately to take a fancy to him She put a vast arm round his shoulder and 
drew him towards her, breathing beer and vomit mto his face. 

‘Wass your name, dearie?’ she said 
‘Smith,’ said Winston. 

‘Smith? said the woman ‘Thass funny My name’s Smith too Why,’ she 
added sentimentally, ‘I might be your mother*’ 

She might, thought Winston, be his mother * She was about the right age and 



874 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

physique, and it was probable that people changed somewhat after twenty 
years in a forced-labour camp 

No one else had spoken to him To a surprising extent the ordinary criminals 
ignored the Party prisoners ‘The pohis,’ they called them, with a sort of 
uninterested contempt The Party prisoners seemed terrified of speaking to 
anybody, and above all of speaking to one another Only once, when two Party 
members, both women, were pressed close together on the bench, he 
overheard amid the dm of voices a few hurriedly whispered words, and m 
particular a reference to something called ‘room one-oh-one’, which he did not 
understand 

It might be two or three hours ago that they had brought him here The dull 
pam in his belly never went away, but sometimes it grew better and sometimes 
worse, and his thoughts expanded or contracted accordingly When it grew 
worse he thought only of the pam itself, and of his desire for food When it 
grew better, panic took hold of him There were moments when he foresaw the 
things that would happen to him with such actuality that his heart galloped and 
his breath stopped He felt the smash of truncheons on his elbows and iron- 
shod boots on his shins, he saw himself grovelling on the floor, screaming for 
mercy through broken teeth He hardly thought of Julia He could not fix his 
mind on her He loved her and would not betray her, but that was only a fact, 
known as he knew the rules of arithmetic He felt no love for her, and he hardly 
even wondered what was happening to her He thought oftener of O’Brien, 
with a flickering hope O’Brien must know that he had been arrested The 
Brotherhood, he had said, never tried to save its members But there was the 
razor blade, they would send the razor blade if they could There would be 
perhaps five seconds before the guard could rush into the cell The blade 
would bite into him with a sort of burning coldness, and even the fingers that 
held it would be cut to the bone Everthmg came back to his sick body, which 
shrank trembling from the smallest pam He was not certain that he would use 
the razor blade even if he got the chance It was more natural to exist from 
moment to moment, accepting another ten minutes’ life even with the 
certainty that there was torture at the end of it 

Sometimes he tried to calculate the number of porcelain bricks in the walls 
of the cell It should have been easy, but he always lost count at some point or 
another More often he wondered where he was, and what time of day it was 
At one moment he felt certain that it was broad daylight outside, and at the 
next equally certain that it was pitch darkness In this place, he knew 
instinctively, the lights would never be turned out. It was the place with no 
darkness he saw now why O’Brien had seemed to recognize the allusion In 
the Ministry of Love there were no windows His cell might be at the heart of 
the building or against its outer wall, it might be ten floors below ground, or 
thirty above it He moved himself mentally from place to place, and tried to 
determine by the feeling of his body whether he was perched high in the air or 
buried deep underground 

. There was a sound of marching boots outside The steel door opened with a 
<flang. A young officer, a trim black-uniformed figure who seemed to glitter all 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 87$ 

over with polished leather, and whose pale, straight-featured face was like a 
wax mask, stepped smartly through the doorway He motioned to the guards 
outside to bring m the prisoner they were leadmgl The poet Ampleforth 
shambled into the cell The door clanged shut again Ampleforth made one 
or two uncertain movements from side to side, as though having some idea that 
there was another door to go out of, and then began to wander up and down the 
cell He had not yet noticed Winston’s presence His troubled eyes were gazing 
at the wall about a metre above the level of Winston’s head He was shoeless, 
large, dirty toes were sticking out of the holes m his socks He was also several 
days away from a shave A scrubby beard covered his face to the cheekbones, 
giving him an air of ruffianism that went oddly with his large weak frame and 
nervous movements 

Wmston roused himself a little from his lethargy He must speak to 
Ampleforth, and risk the yell from the telescreen It was even conceivable that 
Ampleforth was the bearer of the razor blade 
‘Ampleforth,’ he said 

There was no yell from the telescreen Ampleforth paused, mildly startled 
His eyes focused themselves slowly on Wmston 
‘Ah, Smith 1 ’ he said ‘You too*’ 

‘What are you in for?’ 

‘To tell you the truth-’ He sat down awkwardly on the bench opposite 
Wmston ‘There is only one offence, is there not?’ he said 
‘And you have committed it*?’ 

‘Apparently I have ’ 

He put a hand to his forehead and pressed his temples for a moment, as 
though trymg to remember something 

‘These things happen,’ he began vaguely ‘I have been able to recall one 
instance— a possible instance It was an indiscretion, undoubtedly We were 
producing a definitive edition of the poems of Kipling I allowed the word 
“God” to remain at the end of a line I could not help it 1 ’ he added almost 
indignantly raising his face to look at Winston ‘It was impossible to change the 
line The rhyme was “rod”. Do you realize that there are only twelve rhymes 
to “rod” in the entire language? For days I had racked my brains There was 
no other rhyme ’ 

The expression on his face changed The annoyance passed out of it and for 
a moment he looked almost pleased A sort of intellectual warmth, the joy of 
the pedant who had found out some useless fact, shone through the dirt and 
scrubby hair 

‘Has it ever occurred to you,’ he said, ‘that the whole history of English 
poetry has been determined by the fact that the English language lacks 
rhymes?’ 

No, that particular thought had never occurred to Wmston Nor, in the 
circumstances, did it strike him as very important or interesting 
‘Do you know what time of day it is?’ he said 

Ampleforth looked startled again. ‘I had hardly thought about it They 
arrested me— it could be two days ago— perhaps three His eyes fiitted round 



8j6 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

the walls, as though he half expected to find a window somewhere ‘There is no 
difference between night and day m this place I do not see how one can 
calculate the time 5 

They talked desultorily for some minutes, then, without apparent reason, a 
yell from the telescreen bade them be silent Winston sat quietly, his hands 
crossed Ampleforth, too large to sit in comfort on the narrow bench, fidgeted 
from side to side, clasping his lank hands first round one knee, then round the 
other The telescreen barked at him to keep still Time passed Twenty 
minutes, an hour-it was difficult to judge Once more there was a sound of 
boots outside Winston’s entrails contracted Soon, very soon, perhaps m five 
minutes, perhaps now, the tramp of boots would mean that his own turn had 
come 

The door opened The cold-faced young officer stepped into the cell With a 
brief movement of the hand he indicated Ampleforth 

‘Room ioi,’ he said 

Ampleforth marched clumsily out between the guards, his face vaguely 
perturbed, but uncomprehending 

What seemed like a long time passed The pam m Winston’s belly had 
revived His mind sagged round and round on the same track, like a ball falling 
again and again into the same series of slots He had only six thoughts The 
pain m his belly, a piece of bread, the blood and the screaming, O’Brien, Julia, 
the razor blade There was another spasm m his entrails, the heavy boots were 
approaching As the door opened, the wave of air that it created brought in a 
powerful smell of cold sweat Parsons walked into the cell He was wearing 
khaki shorts and a sports-shirt 

This time Winston was startled into self-forgetfulness 

‘ You here 1 ’ he said 

Parsons gave Winston a glance m which there was neither interest nor 
surprise, but only misery He began walking jerkily up and down, evidently 
unable to keep still Each time he straightened his pudgy knees it was apparent 
that they were trembling His eyes had a wide-open, staring look, as though he 
could not prevent himself from gazing at something in the middle distance 

‘What are you m for?’ said Winston, 

‘Thoughtcrime 1 ’ said Parsons, almost blubbering The tone of his voice 
implied at once a complete admission of his guilt and a sort of incredulous 
horror that such a word could be applied to himself He paused opposite 
Wmston and began eagerly appealing to him ‘You don’t think they’ll shoot 
me, do you, old chap? They don’t shoot you if you haven’t actually done 
anything-only thoughts, which you can’t help? I know they give you a fair 
hearing Oh, I trust them for that 1 They’ll know my record, won’t they? You 
know what kind of a chap I was Not a bad chap in my way Not brainy, of 
course, but keen I tried to do my best for the Party, didn’t I? I’ll get off with 
five years, don’t you think? Or even ten years? A chap like me could make 
himself pretty useful in a labour-camp. They wouldn’t shoot me for going off 
the rails just once?’ 

‘Are you guilty?’ said Wmston 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 877 

Qf course I in guilty' cried Parsons with a servile glance at the telescreen 
‘You don’t think the Party would arrest an innocent man, do you’’ His frog- 
like face grew calmer, and even took on a slightly sanctimonious expression 
Thoughtcrime is a dreadful thing, old man,’ he said sententiously ‘It’s 
insidious It can get hold of you without your even knowing it Do you know 
how it got hold of me? In my sleep' Yes, that’s a fact There I was, working 
away, trying to do my bit-never knew I had any bad stuff m my mind at all 
And then I started talking m my sleep Do you know what they heard me 
saying?' 5 

He sank his voice, like someone who is obliged for medical reasons to utter 
an obscenity 

“Down with Big Brother'” Yes, I said that* Said it over and over again, it 
seems Between you and me, old man, I’m glad they got me before it went any 
further Do you know what I’m going to say to them when I go up before the 
tribunal’ “Thank you,” I’m going to say, “thank you for saving me before it 
was too late ” 5 

‘Who denounced you’’ said Winston 

‘It was my little daughter,’ said Parsons with a sort of doleful pride ‘She 
listened at the keyhole Heard what I was saying, and nipped off to the patrols 
the very next day Pretty smart for a nipper of seven, eh' I don’t bear her any 
grudge for it In fact I’m proud of her It shows I brought her up in the right 
spirit, anyway ’ 

He made a few more jerky movements up and down, several times, casting a 
longing glance at the lavatory pan Then he suddenly ripped down his shorts 

‘Excuse me, old man,’ he said ‘I can’t help it It’s the waiting ’ 

He plumped his large posterior into the lavatory pan Wmston covered his 
face with his hands 

‘Smith 1 ’ yelled the voice from the telescreen ‘6079 Smith W ' Uncover your 
face No faces covered in the cells ’ 

Winston uncovered his face Parsons used the lavatory, loudly and 
abundantly It then turned out that the plug was defective and the cell stank 
abominably for hours afterwards 

Parsons was removed More prisoners came and went, mysteriously One, a 
woman, was consigned to ‘Room 101’, and, Winston noticed, seemed to 
shrivel and turn a different colour when she heard the words A time came 
when, if it had been morning when he was brought here, it would be afternoon, 
or if it had been afternoon, then it would be midnight There were six 
prisoners m the cell, men and women All sat very still Opposite Wmston 
there sat a man with a chmless, toothy face exactly like that of some large, 
harmless rodent His fat, mottled cheeks were so pouched at the bottom that it 
was difficult not to believe that he had little stores of food tucked away there. 
His pale-grey eyes flitted timorously from face to face and turned quickly away 
again when he caught anyone’s eye. 

The door opened, and another pnsoner was brought m whose appearance 
sent a momentary chill through Winston He was a commonplace, mean- 
looking man who might have been an engineer or technician of some kind But 



8j8 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

what was startling was the emaciation of his face It was like a skull Because of 
its thinness the mouth and eyes looked disproportionately large, and the eyes 
seemed filled with a murderous, unappeasable hatred of somebody or 
something 

The man sat down on the bench at a little distance from Winston Winston 
did not look at him again, but the tormented, skull-like face was as vivid m his 
mind as though it had been straight m front of his eyes Suddenly he realized 
what was the matter The man was dying of starvation The same thought 
seemed to occur almost simultaneously to everyone in the cell There was a 
very faint stirring all the way round the bench The eyes of the chmless man 
kept flitting towards the skull-faced man, then turning guiltily away, then 
being dragged back by an irresistible attraction Presently he began to fidget on 
his seat At last he stood up, waddled clumsily across the cell, dug down into 
the pocket of his overalls, and, with an abashed air, held out a grimy piece of 
bread to the skull-faced man 

There was a furious, deafening roar from the telescreen The chinless man 
jumped in his tracks The skull-faced man had quickly thrust his hands behind 
his back, as though demonstratmg to all the world that he refused the gift 

‘Bumstead 1 ’ roared the voice ‘2713 Bumstead J 1 Let fall that piece of 
bread!’ 

The chinless man dropped the piece of bread on the floor . 

‘Remain standing where you are/ said the voice ‘Face the door Make no 
movement ’ 

The chmless man obeyed His large pouchy cheeks were quivering 
uncontrollably The door clanged open. As the young officer entered and 
stepped aside, there emerged from behind him a short stumpy guard with 
enormous arms and shoulders He took his stand opposite the chmless man, 
and then, at a signal from the officer, let free a fhghtful blow, with all the 
weight of his body behind it, full m the chinless man’s mouth The force of it 
seemed almost to knock him clear of the floor His body was flung across the 
cell and fetched up against the base of the lavatory seat For a moment he lay as 
though stunned, with dark blood oozing from his mouth and nose A very faint 
whimpering or squeaking, which seemed unconscious, came out of him Then 
he rolled over and raised himself unsteadily on hands and knees Amid a 
stream of blood and saliva, the two halves of a dental plate fell out of his mouth 

The prisoners sat very still, their hands crossed on their knees The chmless 
man climbed back into his place Down one side of his face the flesh was 
darkening. His mouth had swollen into a shapeless cherry-coloured mass with 
a black hole m the middle of it From time to time a little blood dripped on to 
the, breast of his overalls His grey eyes still flitted from face to face, more 
guiltily than ever, as though he were trying to discover how much the others 
despised him for his humiliation 

The door opened. With a small gesture the officer indicated the skull-faced 
man, 

*ta>m 101/ he said 

Tbere was a gasp and a flurry at Winston’s side The man had actually flung 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 879 

himself on his knees on the floor, with his hands clasped together 

‘Comrade! Officer!’ he cried ‘You don’t have to take me to that place' 
Haven’t I told you everything already? What else is it you want to know? 
There’s nothing I wouldn’t confess, nothing' Just tell me what it is and I’ll 
confess it straight off Write it down and I’ll sign it-anythmg' Not room ioi ' 5 
‘Room 101,’ said the officer 

The man’s face, already very pale, turned a colour Winston would not have 
believed possible It was definitely, unmistakably, a shade of green 
‘Do anything to me'’ he yelled ‘You’ve been starvmg me for weeks Finish it 
off and let me die Shoot me Hang me Sentence me to twenty-five years Is 
there somebody else you want me to give away? Just say who it is and I’ll tell 
you anything you want I don’t care who it is or what you do to them I’ve got a 
wife and three children The biggest of them isn’t six years old You can take 
the whole lot of them and cut their throats m front of my eyes, and I’ll stand by 
and watch it But not roomioi'’ 

‘Room 101,’ said the officer 

The man looked frantically round at the other prisoners, as though with 
some idea that he could put another victim in his own place His eyes settled on 
the smashed face of the chinless man He flung out a lean asm 

‘That’s the one you ought to be taking, not me' ’ he shouted ‘You didn’t hear 
what he was saying after they bashed his face Give me a chance and I’ll tell you 
every word of it He’s the one that’s against the Party, not me ’ The guards 
stepped forward The man’s voice rose to a shriek ‘You didn’t hear him 1 ’ he 
repeated ‘Something went wrong with the telescreen He’s the one you want 
Take him, not me 1 ’ 

The two sturdy guards had stooped to take him by the arms But just at this 
moment he flung himself across the floor of the cell and grabbed one of the iron 
legs that supported the bench He had set up a wordless howling, like an 
animal The guards took hold of him to wrench him loose, but he clung on with 
astonishing strength For perhaps twenty seconds they were hauling at him 
The prisoners sat quiet, their hands crossed on their knees, looking straight m 
front of them. The howhng stopped, the man had no breath left for anything 
except hanging on Then there was a different kind of cry A kick from a 
guard’s boot had broken the fingers of one of his hands They dragged him to 
his feet 

‘Room 101,’ said the officer. 

The man was led out, walking unsteadily, with head sunken, nursing his 
crushed hand, all the fight gone out of him 
A long time passed If it had been midmght when the skull-faced man was 
taken away, it was mornmg if morning, it was afternoon Winston was alone, 
and had been alone for hours The pain of sitting on the narrow bench was 
such that often he got up and walked about, unreproved by the telescreen The 
piece of bread still lay where the chinless man had dropped it At the beginning 
it needed a hard effort not to look at it, but presently hunger gave way to thirst. 
His mouth was sticky and evil-tasting The humming sound and the unvarying 
white light induced a sort of faintness, an empty feeling mside his head He 



880 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

would get up because the ache m his bones was no longer bearable, and then 
would sit down again almost at once because he was too dizzy to make sure of 
staying on his feet Whenever his physical sensations were a little under 
control the terror returned Sometimes with a fading hope he thought of 
O’Brien and the razor blade It was thinkable that the razor blade might arrive 
concealed m his food, if he were ever fed More dimly he thought of Julia 
Somewhere or other she was suffering perhaps far worse than he She might be 
screaming with pam at this moment He thought ‘If I could save Julia by 
doubling my owrj, pain, would I do it? Yes, I would 5 But that was merely an 
intellectual decision, taken because he knew that he ought to take it He did not 
feel it In this place you could not feel anything, except pam and the 
foreknowledge of pain Besides, was it possible, when you were actually 
suffering it, to wish for any reason whatever that your own pain should 
increase? But that question was not answerable yet 
The boots were approaching again The door opened O’Brien came in 
Winston started to his feet The shock of the sight had driven all caution out 
of him For the first time m many years he forgot the presence of the telescreen 
‘They’ve got you too 1 ’ he cried 

‘They got me a long time ago,’ said O’Brien with a mild, almost regretful 
irony He stepped aside From behind him there emerged a broad-chested 
guard with a long black truncheon in his hand 
‘You knew this, Winston,’ said O’Brien ‘Don’t deceive yourself You did 
know lt-you have always known it ’ 

Yes, he saw now, he had always known it But there was no time to think of 
that All he had eyes for was the truncheon m the guard’s hand It might fall 
anywhere on the crown, on the tip of the ear, on the upper arm, on the elbow- 
The elbow 1 He had slumped to his knees, almost paralysed, clasping the 
stricken elbow with his other hand Everything had exploded into yellow light 
Inconceivable, inconceivable that one blow could cause such pam' The light 
cleared and he could see the other two looking down at him The guard was 
laughing at his contortions One question at any rate was answered Never, for 
any reason on earth, could you wish for an mcrease of pam Of pam you could 
wish only one thing that it should stop. Nothing m the world was so bad as 
physical pam In the face of pam there are no heroes, no heroes, he thought 
over and over as he writhed on the floor, clutching uselessly at his disabled left 
arm 



2 


He was lying on something that felt like a camp bed, except that it was higher 
off the ground and that he was fixed down m some way so that he could not 
move Light that seemed stronger than usual was falling on his face O’Brien 
was standing at his side, looking down at him intently At the other side of him 
stood a man in a white coat, holding a hypodermic syringe 

Even after his eyes were open he took in his surroundings only gradually He 
had the impression of swimming up into this room from some quite different 
world, a sort of under-water world far beneath it How long he had been down 
there he did not know Since the moment when they arrested him he had not 
seen darkness or daylight Besides, his memories were not continuous There 
had been times when consciousness, even the sort of consciousness that one 
has in sleep, had stopped dead and started again after a blank interval But 
whether the intervals were of days or weeks or only seconds, there was no way 
of knowing 

With that first blow on the elbow the nightmare had started Later he was to 
realize that all that then happened was merely a preliminary, a routine 
interrogation to which nearly all prisoners were subjected There was a long 
range of cnmes-espionage, sabotage, and the like-to which everyone had to 
confess as a matter of course. The confession was a formality, though the 
torture was real How many times he had been beaten, how long the beatings 
had continued, he could not remember Always there were five or six men in 
black uniforms at him simultaneously Sometimes it was fists, sometimes it 
was truncheons, sometimes it was steel rods, sometimes it was boots There 
were times when he rolled about the floor, as shameless as an animal, writhing 
his body this way and that in an endless, hopeless effort to dodge the kicks, and 
simply inviting more and yet more kicks, in his ribs, m his belly, on his elbows, 
on his shins, in his groin, m his testicles, on the bone at the base of his spine 
There were times when it went on and on until the cruel, wicked, unforgivable 
thing seemed to him not that the guards continued to beat him but that he 
could not force himself into losing consciousness There were times when his 
nerve so forsook him that he began shouting for mercy even before the beating 
began, when the mere sight of a fist drawn back for a blow was enough to make 
him pour forth a confession of real and imaginary crimes. There were other 
times when he started out with the resolve of confessing nothing, when every 
word had to be forced out of ham between gasps of pam, and there were times 
when he feebly tried to compromise^ when he said to himself T mil confess^ 



882 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

but not yet I must hold out till the pam becomes unbearable Three more 
kicks, two more kicks, and then I will tell them what they want ’ Sometimes he 
was beaten till he could hardly stand, then flung like a sack of potatoes on to the 
stone floor of a cell, left to recuperate for a few hours, and then taken out and 
beaten again There were also longer periods of recovery He remembered 
them dimly, because they were spent chiefly m sleep or stupor He 
remembered a cell with a plank bed, a sort of shelf sticking out from the wall, 
and a tin wash-basin, and meals of hot soup and bread and sometimes coffee 
He remembered a surly barber arriving to scrape his chin and crop his hair, 
and busmess-like, unsympathetic men in white coats feeling his pulse, tapping 
his reflexes, turning up his eyelids, running harsh fingers over him in search of 
broken bones, and shooting needles into his arm to make him sleep 

The beatings grew less frequent, and became mainly a threat, a horror to 
which he could be sent back at any moment when his answers were 
unsatisfactory His questioners now were not ruffians in black uniforms but 
Party intellectuals, little rotund men with quick movements and flashing 
spectacles, who worked on him in relays over periods which lasted-he 
thought, he could not be sure-ten or twelve hours at a stretch These other 
questioners saw to it that he was m constant slight pam, but it was not chiefly 
pain that they relied on They slapped his face, wrung his ears, pulled his hair, 
made him stand on one leg, refused him leave to urinate, shone glaring lights m 
his face until his eyes ran with water, but the aim of this was simply to 
humiliate him and destroy his power of arguing and reasoning Their real 
weapon was the merciless questioning that went on and on, hour after hour, 
tripping him up, laying traps for him, twisting everything that he said, 
convicting him at every step of lies and self-contradiction, until he began 
weeping as much from shame as from nervous fatigue Sometimes he would 
weep half a dozen times in a single session Most of the time they screamed 
abuse at him and threatened at every hesitation to deliver him over to the 
guards again, but sometimes they would suddenly change their tune, call him 
comrade, appeal to him in the name of Ingsoc and Big Brother, and ask him 
sorrowfully whether even now he had not enough loyalty to the Party left to 
make him wish to undo the evil he had done When his nerves were in rags after 
hours of questioning, even this appeal could reduce him to snivelling tears In 
the end the nagging voices broke him down more completely than the boots 
and fists of the guards He became simply a mouth that uttered, a hand that 
signed, whatever was demanded of him His sole concern was to find out what 
they wanted him to confess, and then confess it quickly, before the bullying 
started anew He confessed to the assassination of eminent Party members, the 
distribution of seditious pamphlets, embezzlement of public funds, sale of 
military secrets, sabotage of every kind He confessed that he had been a spy in 
the pay of the Eastasian government as far back as 1968 He confessed that he 
was a religious believer, an admirer of capitalism, and a sexual pervert He 
confessed that he had murdered his wife, although he knew, and his 
questioners must have known, that his wife was still alive. He confessed that 
for years he had been in personal touch with Goldstein and had been a member 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 88 3 

of an underground organization which had included almost every human 
being he had ever known It was easier to confess everything and implicate 
everybody Besides, m a sense it was all true It was true that he had been the 
enemy of the Party, and m the eyes of the Party there was no distinction 
between the thought and the deed 

There were also memories of another kind They stood out m his mmd 
disconnectedly, like pictures with blackness all round them 
He was m a cell which might have been either dark or light, because he could 
see nothing except a pair of eyes Near at hand some kind of instrument was 
ticking slowly and regularly The eyes grew larger and more luminous 
Suddenly he floated out of his seat, dived into the eyes, and was swallowed up 
He was strapped into a chair surrounded by dials, under dazzling lights A 
man m a white coat was reading the dials There was a tramp of heavy boots 
outside The door clanged open The waxen-faced officer marched m, 
followed by two guards 
‘Room 1 01,* said the officer 

The man m the white coat did not turn round He did not look at Winston 
either, he was looking only at the dials 

He was rolling down a mighty corridor, a kilometre wide, full of glorious, 
golden light, roaring with laughter and shoutmg out confessions at the top of 
his voice He was confessing everything, even the things he had succeeded in 
holding back under the torture He was relating the entire history of his life to 
an audience who knew it already With him were the guards, the other 
questioners, the men in white coats, O’Brien, Julia, Mr Charrington, all 
rolling down the corridor together and shouting with laughter Some dreadful 
thing which had lain embedded in the future had somehow been skipped over 
and had not happened Everything was all right, there was no more pam, the 
last detail of his life was laid bare, understood, forgiven 
He was starting up from the plank bed in the half-certainty that he had heard 
O’Brien’s voice All through his interrogation, although he had never seen 
him, he had had the feeling that O’Brien was at his elbow, just out of sight It 
was O’Brien who was directing everything It was he who set the guards on to 
Winston and who prevented them from killing him It was he who decided 
when Winston should scream with pam, when he should have a respite, when 
he should be fed, when he should sleep, when the drugs should be pumped 
into his arm It was he who asked the questions and suggested the answers. He 
was the tormentor, he was the protector, he was the inquisitor, he was the 
friend And once-Wmston could not remember whether it was in drugged 
sleep, or in normal sleep, or even in a moment of wakefulness-a voice 
murmured in his ear ‘Don’t worry, Winston; you are m my keeping For seven 
years I have watched over you, Now the turning-point has come I shall save 
you, I shall make you perfect ’ He was not sure whether it was O’Brien’s voice, 
but it was the same voice that had said to him, ‘We shall meet m the place 
where there is no darkness,’ in that other dream, seven years ago. 

He did not remember any ending to his mterrogation There was a period of 
blackness and then the cell, or room> in which he now was had gradually 



884 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

materialized round him He was almost flat on his back, and unable to move 
His body was held down at every essential point Even the back of his head was 
gripped in some manner O’Brien was looking down at him gravely and rather 
sadly His face, seen from below, looked coarse and worn, with pouches under 
the eyes and tired lines from nose to chm He was older than Winston had 
thought him, he was perhaps forty-eight or fifty Under his hand there was a 
dial with a lever on top and figures running round the face 
£ I told you,’ said O’Brien, ‘that if we met again it would be here ’ 

‘Yes,’ said Winston 

Without any warning except a slight movement of O’Brien’s hand, a wave of 
pam flooded his body It was a frightening pam, because he could not see what 
was happemng, and he had the feeling that some mortal injury was being done 
to him He did not know whether the thing was really happening, or whether 
the effect was electrically produced, but his body was being wrenched out of 
shape, the joints were being slowly torn apart Although the pain had brought 
the sweat out on his forehead, the worst of all was the fear that his backbone 
was about to snap He set his teeth and breathed hard through his nose, trying 
to keep silent as long as possible 

‘You are afraid,’ said O’Brien, watching his face, ‘that in another moment 
something is going to break Your especial fear is that it will be your backbone 
You have a vivid mental picture of the vertebrae snapping apart and the spinal 
fluid dripping out of them That is what you are thinking, is it not, Winston?’ 
Winston did not answer O’Brien drew back the lever on the dial The wave 
of pam receded almost as quickly as it had come 

‘That was forty,’ said O’Brien ‘You can see that the numbers on this dial 
run up to a hundred Will you please remember, throughout our conversation, 
that I have it m my power to inflict pam on you at any moment and to whatever 
degree I choose? If you tell me any lies, or attempt to prevaricate in any way, or 
even fall below your usual level of intelligence, you will cry out with pam, 
instantly Do you understand that?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Winston 

O’Brien’s manner became less severe He resettled his spectacles 
thoughtfully, and took a pace or two up and down When he spoke his voice 
was gentle and patient He had the air of a doctor, a teacher, even a priest, 
anxious to explain and persuade rather than to punish. 

‘I am taking trouble with you, Winston,’ he said, ‘because you are worth 
trouble You know perfectly well what is the matter with you You have known 
it for years, though you have fought against the knowledge You are mentally 
deranged You suffer from a defective memory You are unable to remember 
real events and you persuade yourself that you remember other events which 
never happened Fortunately it is curable You have never cured yourself of it, 
because you did not choose to There was a small effort of the will that you 
were not ready to make Even now, I am well aware, you are clinging to your 
disease under the impression that it is a virtue Now we will take an example 
At this moment, which power is Oceania at war with?’ 

*When I was arrested, Oceania was at war with Eastasia ’ 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 88 s 

‘With Eastasia Good And Oceania has always been at war with Eastasia, 
has it not 7,5 

Winston drew in his breath He opened his mouth to speak and then did not 
speak He could not take his eyes away from the dial 

‘The truth, please, Winston Your truth Tell me what you think you 
remember ’ 

‘I remember that until only a week before I was arrested, we were not at war 
with Eastasia at all We were m alliance with them The war was against 
Eurasia That had lasted for four years Before that-’ 

O’Brien stopped him with a movement of the hand 

‘Another example,’ he said ‘Some years ago you had a very serious delusion 
indeed You believed that three men, three one-time Party members named 
Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford-men who were executed for treachery and 
sabotage after making the fullest possible confession-were not guilty of the 
crimes they were charged with You believed that you had seen unmistakable 
documentary evidence proving that their confessions were false There was a 
certain photograph about which you had a hallucination You believed that you 
had actually held it m your hands It was a photograph something like this ’ 

An oblong slip of newspaper had appeared between O’Brien’s fingers For 
perhaps five seconds it was within the angle of Winston’s vision It was a 
photograph, and there was no question of its identity It was the photograph 
It was another copy of the photograph of Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford at 
the Party function in New York, which he had chanced upon eleven years ago 
and promptly destroyed For only an instant it was before his eyes, then it was 
out of sight again But he had seen it, unquestionably he had seen it 1 He made a 
desperate, agonizing effort to wrench the top half of his body free It was 
impossible to move so much as a centimetre m any direction For the moment 
he had even forgotten the dial All he wanted was to hold the photograph in his 
fingers again, or at least to see it 

‘It exists 1 ’ he cried 

‘No,’ said O’Brien 

He stepped across the room There was a memory hole in the opposite wall 
O’Brien lifted the grating Unseen, the frail slip of paper was whirling away on 
the current of warm air, it was vanishing m a flash of flame O’Brien turned 
away from the wall 

‘Ashes,’ he said ‘Not even identifiable ashes Dust It does not exist It 
never existed ’ 

‘But it did exist 1 It does exist' It exists m memory I remember it You 
remember it ’ 

‘I do not remember it,’ said O’Brien 

Winston’s heart sank That was doublethink He had a feeling of deadly 
helpessness If he could have been certain that O’Brien was lying? it would not 
have seemed to matter But it was perfectly possible that O’Brien had really 
forgotten the photograph And if so, then already he would have forgotten his 
demal of remembering it, and forgotten the act of forgettmg How could one 
be sure that it was simply trickery? Perhaps that lunatic dislocation in the mind 



886 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

could really happen that was the thought that defeated him 

O’Brien was looking down at him speculatively More than ever he had the 
air of a teacher taking pains with a wayward but promising child 

‘There is a Party slogan dealing with the control of the past/ he said ‘Repeat 
it, if you please ’ 

‘ “Who controls the past controls the future who controls -the present 
controls the past”/ repeated Winston obediently 

‘ “Who controls the present controls the past”/ said O’Brien, nodding his 
head with slow approval ‘Is it your opinion, Winston, that the past has real 
existence?’ 

Again the feeling of helplessness descended upon Winston His eyes flitted 
towards the dial He not only did not know whether ‘yes’ or ‘no’ was the 
answer that would save him from pam, he did not even know which answer he 
believed to be the true one 

O’Brien smiled faintly ‘You are no metaphysician, Winston/ he said ‘Until 
this moment you had never considered what is meant by existence I will put it 
more precisely Does the past exist concretely, m space? Is there somewhere or 
other a place, a world of solid objects, where the past is still happening?’ 

‘No’ 

‘Then where does the past exist, if at all?’ 

‘In records It is written down ’ 

‘In records And-?’ 

‘In the mind In human memories ’ 

‘In memory. Very well, then We, the Party, control all records, and we 
control all memories Then we control the past, do we not?’ 

‘But how can you stop people remembering things?’ cried Winston again 
momentarily forgetting the dial ‘It is involuntary It is outside oneself How 
can you control memory? You have not controlled mine 1 ’ 

O’Brien’s manner grew stern again He laid his hand on the dial 
‘On the contrary/ he said, ‘ you have not controlled it That is what has 
brought you here You are here because you have failed m humility, m self- 
disciphne You would not make the act of submission which is the price of 
sanity You preferred to be a lunatic, a minority of one Only the disciplined 
mind can see reality, Winston You believe that reality is something objective, 
external, existing in its own right. You also believe that the nature of reality is 
self-evident When you delude yourself into thinking that you see something, 
you assume that everyone else sees the same thing as you But I tell you, 
Winston, that reality is not external Reality exists m the human mind, and 
nowhere else Not m the individual mmd, which can make mistakes, and in any 
case soon perishes, only in the mmd of the Party, which is collective and 
immortal Whatever the Party holds to be truth, is truth It is impossible to see 
reality except by looking through the eyes of the Party That is the fact that you 
haveghtto xefe&fn, Winston. It needs an act of self-destruction, an effort of the 
Will: Yon must humble yourself before you can become sane ’ 

* Hepaused fox a few moments, as though to allow what he had been saying to 



Nineteen Eighty-Four ggj 

Do you remember, he went on, ‘writing in your diary, “Freedom is the 
freedom to say that two plus two make four”?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Winston 

O’Brien held up his left hand, its back towards Winston, with the thumb 
hidden and the four fingers extended 

‘How many fingers am I holding up, Winston?’ 

‘Four ’ 

‘And if the Party says that it is not four but five-then how many’’ 

‘Four ’ 

The word ended in a gasp of pam The needle of the dial had shot up to fifty- 
five The sweat had sprung out all over Winston’s body The air tore into his 
lungs and issued again in deep groans which even by clenching his teeth he 
could not stop O’Brien watched him, the four fingers still extended He drew 
back the lever This time the pam was only slightly eased 
‘How many fingers, Winston’’ 

‘Four ’ 

The needle went up to sixty 
‘How many fingers, Winston?’ 

‘Four 1 Four 1 What else can I say? Four 1 ’ 

The needle must have risen again, but he did not look at it The heavy, stern 
face and the four fingers filled his vision The fingers stood up before his eyes 
like pillars, enormous, blurry, and seeming to vibrate, but unmistakably four 
‘How many fingers, Winston?’ 

‘Four 1 Stop it, stop it' How can you go on? Four' Four 1 ’ 

‘How many fingers, Winston?’ 

‘Five 1 Five' Five' 5 

‘No,Wmston, that is no use You are lying You still think there are four 
How many fingers, please?’ 

‘Four 1 Five' Four' Anything you like Only stop it, stop the pain'’ 
Abruptly he was sitting up with O’Brien’s arm round his shoulders He had 
perhaps lost consciousness for a few seconds The bonds that had held his 
body down were loosened He felt very cold, he was shaking uncontrollably, 
his teeth were chattering, the tears were rolling down his cheeks For a 
moment he clung to O’Brien like a baby, curiously comforted by the heavy arm 
round his shoulders He had the feeling that O’Brien was his protector, that 
the pam was something that came from outside, from some other source, and 
that it was O’Brien who would save him from it 

‘You are a slow learner, Winston,’ said O’Brien gently 
‘How can I help it?’ he blubbered ‘How can I help seeing what is in front of 
my eyes?’ he blubbered ‘How can I help seeing what is m front of my eyes? 
Two and two are four ’ 

‘Sometimes, Winston Sometimes they are five, Sometimes they are three. 
Sometimes they are all of them at once You must try harder It is not easy to 
become sane ’ 

He laid Winston down on the bed The grip of his limbs tightened again, but 
the pam had ebbed away and the trembhng had stopped, leaving him merely 



888 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

weak and cold O’Brien motioned with his head to the man in the white coat, 
who had stood immobile throughout the proceedings The man in the white 
coat bent down and looked closely into Winston’s eyes, felt his pulse, laid an 
ear against his chest, tapped here and there, then he nodded to O’Brien 
‘Again,’ said O’Brien 

The pain flowed into Winston’s body The needle must be at seventy, 
seventy-five He had shut his eyes this time He knew that the fingers were still 
there, and still four All that mattered was somehow to stay alive until the 
spasm was over He had ceased to notice whether he was crying out or not The 
pam lessened again He opened his eyes O’Brien had drawn back the lever 
‘How many fingers, Winston’’ 

‘Four I suppose there are four I would see five if I could I am trying to see 
five ’ 

‘Which do you wish to persuade me that you see five, or really to see them’’ 
‘Really to see them ’ 

‘Again,’ said O’Brien 

Perhaps the needle was at eighty-ninety Winston could not intermittently 
remember why the pam was happening Behind his screwed-up eyelids a forest 
of fingers seemed to be moving in a sort of dance, weaving in and out, 
disappearing behind one another and reappearing again He was trying to 
count them, he could not remember why He knew only that it was impossible 
to count them, and that this was somehow due to the mysterious identity 
between five and four The pam died down again When he opened his eyes it 
was to find that he was still seeing the same thing Innumerable fingers, like 
moving trees, were still streaming past in either direction, crossing and 
recrossing He shut his eyes again 
‘How many fingers am I holding up, Winston’’ 

‘I don’t know I don’t know You will kill me if you do that again Four, five, 
six-in all honesty I don’t know ’ 

‘Better,’ said O’Brien 

A needle slid into Winston’s arm Almost m the same instant a blissful, 
healing warmth spread all through his body The pam was already half- 
forgotten He opened his eyes and looked up gratefully at O’Brien At sight of 
the heavy, lined faces, so ugly and so intelligent, his heart seemed to turn over 
If he could have moved he would have stretched out aJimdandvlard it on 
O’Brien’s arm He had never loved him so deeply as at this 
merely because he had stopped the pam. The old feeling, that at bottom it did 
not matter whether O’Brien was a friend or an enemy, had come back O’Brien 
was a person who could be talked to Perhaps one did not want to be loved so 
much as to be understood. O’Brien had tortured him to the edge of lunacy, and 
m a little while, it was certain, he would send him to his death It made no 
difference, Fm ^ense, l|iat went deeper than friendship, they were 
intimates^ somewhere or other, although the actual words might never be 
spoken, there was a. place where they could meet and talk. O’Brien was looking 
,d^ft^in|B]%«t-expression which suggested that the same thought might 
'When he spoke it was m an easy, conversational tone 



889 


Nineteen Eighty-Four 

’Do you know where you are, Winston?’ he said 
‘I don’t know I can guess In the Ministry of Love ’ 

‘Do you know how long you have been here?’ 

‘I don’t know Days, weeks, months-I think it is months ’ 

‘And why do you imagine that we bring people to this place?’ 

‘To make them confess ’ 

‘No that is not the reason Try again ’ 

‘To punish them ’ 

‘No 1 ’ exclaimed O’Brien His voice had changed extraordinarily, and his 
face had suddenly become both stern and animated ‘No 1 Not merely to extract 
your confession, not to punish you Shall I tell you why we have brought you 
here? To cure you 1 To make you sane 1 Will you understand, Winston, that no 
one whom we bring to this place ever leaves our hands uncured? We are not 
interested in those stupid crimes that you have committed The Party is not 
interested in the overt act the thought is all we care about We do not merely 
destroy our enemies, we change them. Do you understand what I mean by 
that?’ 

He was bending over Winston His face looked enormous because of its 
nearness, and hideously ugly because it was seen from below. Moreover it was 
filled with a sort of exaltation, a lunatic intensity Again Winston’s heart 
shrank If it had been possible he would have cowered deeper into the bed He 
felt certain that O’Brien was about to twist the dial out of sheer wantonness At 
this moment, however, O’Brien turned away He took a pace or two up and 
down Then he continued less vehemently 

‘The first thing for you to understand is that m this place there are no 
martyrdoms You have read of the religious persecutions of the past In the 
Middle Ages there was the Inquisition It was a failure It set out to eradicate 
heresy, and ended by perpetuating it For every heretic it burned at the stake, 
thousands of others rose up Why was that? Because the Inquisition killed its 
enemies in the open, and killed them while they were still unrepentant m fact, 
it killed them because they were unrepentant Men were dying because they 
would not abandon their true beliefs Naturally all the glory belonged to the 
victim and all the shame to the Inquisitor who burned him Later, m the 
twentieth century, there were the totalitarians, as they were called There were 
the German Nazis and the Russian Communists The Russians persecuted 
heresy more cruelly than the Inquisition had done. And they imagined that 
they had learned from the mistakes of the past, they knew, at any rate, that one 
must not make martyrs Before they exposed their victims to public trial, they 
deliberately set themselves to destroy their dignity They wore them down by 
torture and sohtude until they were despicable, cringing wretches, confessing 
whatever was put into their mouths, covering themselves with abuse, accusing 
and sheltering behind one another, whimpering for mercy And yet after only a 
few years the same thing had happened over again. The dead men had become 
martyrs and their degradation was forgotten Once again, why was it? In the 



8 go Nineteen Eighty-Four 

uttered here are true We make them true And above all we do not allow the 
dead to rise up against us You must stop imagining that posterity will 
vindicate you, Winston Posterity will never hear of you You will be lifted 
clean out from the stream of history We shall turn you into gas and pour you 
into the stratosphere Nothing will remain of you, not a name m a register, not 
a memory m a living brain You will be annihilated m the past as well as in the 
future You will never have existed ’ 

Then why bother to torture me’ thought Winston, with a momentary 
bitterness O’Brien checked his step as though Winston had uttered the 
thought aloud His large ugly face came nearer, with the eyes a little narrowed 

‘You are thinking,’ he said, ‘that since we intend to destroy you utterly, so 
that nothing that you say or do can make the smallest difference-in that case, 
why do we go to the trouble of interrogating you first’* That is what you were 
thinking, was it not’*’ 

‘Yes,’ said Winston 

O’Brien smiled slightly ‘You are a flaw m the pattern, Winston You are a 
stain that must be wiped out Did I not tell you just now that we are different 
from the persecutors of the past’ We are not content with negative obedience, 
nor even with the most abject submission When finally you surrender to us, it 
must be of your own free will We do not destroy the heretic because he resists 
us so long as he resists us we never destroy him We convert him, we capture 
his inner mind, we reshape him We burn all evil and all illusion out of him, we 
bring him over to our side, not m appearance, but genuinely, heart and soul 
We make him one of ourselves before we kill him It is intolerable to us that an 
erroneous thought should exist anywhere m the world, however secret and 
powerless it may be Even in the instant of death we cannot permit any 
deviation In the old days the heretic walked to the stake still a heretic, 
proclaiming his heresy, exulting in it Even the victim of the Russian purges 
could carry rebellion locked up m his skull as he walked down the passage 
waiting for the bullet But we make the brain perfect before we blow it out 
The command of the old despotisms was “Thou shalt not” The command of 
the totalitarians was “Thou shalt” Our command is “Thou art” No one 
whom we bring to this place ever stands out against us Everyone is washed 
clean Even those three miserable traitors in whose innocence you once 
believed- Jones, Aaronson, and Rntherford-in the end we broke them down I 
took part m their interrogation any self I saw them gradually worn down, 
whimpering, grovelling, weepmg-and in the end it was not with pain or fear, 
only with penitence. By the time we had’fimshed with them they were only the 
shells of men There was nothing left in them except sorrow for what they had 
done, and love of Big Brother Jt was touching to see how they loved him 
They begged to be shot quickly, so that they could die while their minds were 
stiU dean,’ 

His voice had grown almostdreamy The exaltation, the lunatic enthusiasm, 
was still in his face He is not pretending, thought Winston, he is not a 
hypocrite; he believes every word he says What most oppressed him was the 
consciousness of his own intellectual inferiority He watched the heavy yet 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 891 

graceful form strolling to and fro, in and out of the range of his vision O’Brien 
was a being in all ways larger than himself There was no idea that he had ever 
had, or could have, that O’Brien had not long ago known, examined, and 
rejected His mind contained Winston’s mmd But m that case how could it be 
true that O’Brien was mad? It must be he, Winston, who was mad O’Brien 
halted and looked down at him His voice had grown stern again 

‘Do not imagine that you will save yourself, Winston, however completely 
you surrender to us No one who has once gone astray is ever spared And even 
if we chose to let you live out the natural term of your life, still you would never 
escape from us What happens to you here is for ever Understand that m 
advance We shall crush you down to the point from which there is no coming 
back Things will happen to you from which you could not recover, if you lived 
a thousand years Never again will you be capable of ordinary human feeling 
Everything will be dead inside you. Never again will you be capable of love, or 
friendship, or joy of living, or laughter, or curiosity, or courage, or integrity 
You will be hollow We shall squeeze you empty, and then we shall fill you 
with ourselves ’ 

He paused and signed to the man in the white coat Winston was aware of 
some heavy piece of apparatus being pushed into place behind his head 
O’Brien had sat down beside the bed, so that his face was almost on a level with 
Winston’s 

‘Three thousand,’ he said, speaking over Winston’s head to the man m the 
white coat 

Two soft pads, which felt slightly moist, clamped themselves against 
Winston’s temples He quailed There was pain coming, a new kind of pam 
O’Brien laid a hand reassuringly, almost kindly, on his 

‘This tune it will not hurt,’ he said ‘Keep your eyes fixed on mine ’ 

At this moment there was a devastatmg explosion, or what seemed like an 
explosion, though it was not certain whether there was any noise There was 
undoubtedly a blinding flash of light Winston was not hurt, only prostrated 
Although he had already been lying on his back when the thing happened, he 
had a curious feeling that he had been knocked into that position A terrific, 
painless blow had flattened him out Also something had happened inside his 
head As his eyes regained their focus he remembered who he was, and where 
he was, and recognized the face that was gazing into his own, but somewhere or 
other there was a large patch of emptiness, as though a piece had been taken 
out of his brain 

‘It will not last,’ said O’Brien ‘Look me in the eyes. What country is 
Oceania at war with?’ 

Winston thought He knew what was meant by Oceania and that he himself 
was a citizen of Oceania He also remembered Eurasia and Eastasia, but who 
was at war with whom he did not know In fact he had not been aware that 
there was any war. 

‘I don’t remember.’ 

‘Oceania is at war with Eastasia Do you remember that now?’ 

‘Yes’ 



8g2 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

‘Oceania has always been at war with Eastasia Since the beginning of your 
life, since the beginning of the Party, since the beginning of history, the war 
has continued without a break, always the same war Do you remember that’’ 
‘Yes ’ 

‘Eleven years ago you created a legend about three men who had been 
condemned to death for treachery You pretended that you had a piece of 
paper which proved them innocent No such piece of paper ever existed You 
invented it, and later you grew to believe m it You remember now the very 
moment at which you first invented it Do you remember that’’ 

‘Yes 5 

‘Just now I held up the fingers of my hand to you You saw five fingers Do 
you remember that’’ 

‘Yes’ 

O’Brien held up the fingers of his left hand, with the thumb concealed 
‘There are five fingers there Do you see five fingers’’ 

‘Yes ’ 

And he did see them, for a fleeting instant, before the scenery of his mind 
changed He saw five fingers, and there was no deformity Then everything 
was normal again, and the old fear, the hatred, and the bewilderment came 
crowding back again But thtere had been a moment-he did not know how 
long, thirty seconds, perhaps-of luminous certainty, when each new 
suggestion of O’Brien’s had filled up a patch of emptiness and become absolute 
truth, and when two and two could have been three as easily as five, if that were 
what was needed It had faded out before O’Brien had dropped his hand, but 
though he could not recapture it, he could remember it, as one remembers a 
vivid experience at some remote period of one’s life when one was in effect a 
different person 

‘You see now,’ said O’Brien ‘that it is at any rate possihle ’ 

‘Yes,’ said Winston 

O’Brien stood up with a satisfied air Over to his left Winston saw the man in 
the white coat break an ampoule and draw back the plunger of a syringe 
O’Brien turned to Winston with a smile- In almost the old manner he resettled 
his spectacles on his nose 

*Do you remember writing in your diary,’ he said, ‘that it did nut matter 
whether I was a friend or an enemy, since I was at least a person who 
understood you and could be talked to’ You were right I enjoy talking to you 
Your mmd appeals to me It resembles my own mind except that you happen 
to be insane Before we bring the session to an end you can ask me a few 
questions, if you choose ’ 

‘Any question I like?’ 

‘Anything ’ He saw that Winston’s eyes were upon the dial ‘It is switched 
off. What is your first question?’ 

‘What have you done with Julia’’ said Winston 

O’Brien smiled again ‘She betrayed you, Winston Immediately- 
unre&ervedly I have seldom seen anyone come over to us so promptly You 
would hardly recognize her if you saw her All her rebelliousness, her deceit, 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 893 

her folly, her dirty-mindedness— everything has been burned out of her It was 
a perfect conversion, a textbook case ’ 

‘You tortured her?’ 

O’Brien left this unanswered ‘Next question,’ he said 
‘Does Big Brother exist?’ 

‘Of course he exists The Party exists Big Brother is the embodiment of the 
Party ’ 

‘Does he exist m the same way as I exist?’ 

‘You do not exist,’ said O’Brien 

Once again the sense of helplessness assailed him He knew, or he could 
imagine, the arguments which proved his own non-existence, but they were 
nonsense, they were only a play on words Did not the statement, ‘You do not 
exist’, contain a logical absurdity? But what use was it to say so? His mind 
shrivelled as he thought of the unanswerable, mad arguments with which 
O’Brien would demolish him 

‘I think I exist,’ he said wearily ‘I am conscious of my own identity I was 
born and I shall die 'I have arms and legs I occupy a particular point in space 
No other solid object can occupy the same point simultaneously In that sense, 
does Big Brother exist?’ 

‘It is of no importance He exists ’ 

‘Will Big Brother ever die?’ 

‘Of course not How could he die? Next question ’ 

‘Does the Brotherhood exist?’ 

‘That, Winston, you will never know If we choose to set you free when we 
have finished with you, and if you live to be mnety years old, still you will 
never learn whether the answer to that question is Yes or No As long as you 
live it will be an unsolved riddle in your mind ’ 

Winston lay silent His breast rose and fell a little faster He still had not 
asked the question that had come into his mind the first He had got to ask it, 
and yet it was as though his tongue would not utter it There was a trace of 
amusement m O’Brien’s face Even his spectacles seemed to wear an ironical 
gleam He knows, thought Winston suddenly, he knows what I am going to 
ask 1 At the thought the words burst out of him 
‘What is m Room ioi?’ 

The expression on O’Brien’s face did not change He answered drily 
‘You know what is in Room 101, Winston Everyone knows what is m Room 
‘ 101 ’ 

He raised a finger to the man m the white coat Evidently the session was at 
an end A needle jerked into Winston’s arm He sank almost instantly into deep 
sleep 



3 


‘There are three stages m your reintegration,’ said O’Brien ‘There is learning, 
there is understanding, and there is acceptance It is time for you to enter upon 
the second stage ’ 

As always, Winston was lying flat on his back But of late his bonds were 
looser They still held him to the bed, but he could move his knees a little and 
could turn his head from side to side and raise his arms from the elbow The 
dial, also, had grown to be less of a terror He could evade its pangs if he was 
quick-witted enough it was chiefly when he showed stupidity that O’Brien 
pulled the lever Sometimes they got through a whole session without use of 
the dial He could not remember how many sessions there had been The 
whole process seemed to stretch out over a long, indefinite time-weeks, 
possibly-and the intervals between the sessions might sometimes have been 
days, sometimes only an hour or two 

‘As you lie there,’ said O’Brien, ‘you have often wondered-you have even 
asked me-why the Ministry of Love should expend so much time and trouble 
on you And when you were free you were puzzled by what was essentially the 
same question You could grasp the mechanics of the Society you lived in, but 
not its underlying motives Do you remember writing m your diary, “I 
understand how I do not understand why”? It was when you thought about 
"why” that you doubted your own sanity You have read the book, Goldstein’s 
book, or parts of it, at least Did it tell you anything that you did not know 
already?’ 

‘You have read it?’ said Winston 

‘I wrote it That is to say, I collaborated m writing it No book is produced 
individually, as you know ’ 

‘Is it true, what it says?* 

‘A description, yes The programme it sets forth is nonsense The secret 
accumulation of knowledge-a gradual spread of enhghtenment-ultimately a 
proletarian rebelhon-the overthrow of the Party You foresaw yourself that 
that was what it would say It is all nonsense The proletarians will never 
revolt, notm a thousand years or a million They cannot I do not have to tell 
you the reason you know it already. If you have ever cherished any dreams of 
violent insurrection, you must abandon them There is no way in which the 
Party , can be overthrown The rule of the Party is for ever Make that the 
sitting-point of your thoughts ’ 

He came closer to the bed ‘For ever 1 ’ he repeated ‘And now let us get back 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 89s 

to the question of “how” and “why” You understand well enough how the 
Party maintains itself in power Now tell me why we cling to power What is 
our motive? Why should we want power? Go on, speak,’ he added as Winston 
remained silent 

Nevertheless Winston did not speak for another moment or two A feeling of 
weariness had overwhelmed him The faint, mad gleam of enthusiasm had 
come back into O’Brien’s face He knew in advance what O’Brien would say 
That the Party did not seek power for its own ends, but only for the good of the 
majority That it sought power because men in the mass were frail cowardly 
creatures who could not endure liberty or face the truth, and must be ruled 
over and systematically deceived by others who were stronger than 
themselves That the choice for mankind lay between freedom and happiness, 
and that, for the great bulk of mankind, happiness was better That the Party 
was the eternal guardian of the weak, a dedicated sect doing evil that good 
might come, sacrificing its own happiness to that of others The terrible thing, 
thought Winston, the terrible thing was that when O’Brien said this he would 
believe it You could see it m his face O’Brien knew everything A thousand 
times better than Winston he knew what the world was really like, in what 
degradation the mass of human beings lived and by what lies and barbarities 
the Party kept them there He had understood it all, weighed it all, and it made 
no difference all was justified by the ultimate purpose What can you do, 
thought Winston, against the lunatic who is more intelligent than yourself, 
who gives your arguments a fair hearing and then simply persists in his lunacy? 

‘You are ruling over us for our own good,’ he said feebly ‘You believe that 
human beings are not fit to govern themselves, and therefore-’ 

He started and almost cried out A pang of pain had shot through his body 
O’Brien had pushed the lever of the dial up to thirty-five 
‘That was stupid, Wmston, stupid 1 ’ he said ‘You should know better than 
to say a thing like that ’ 

He pulled the lever back and continued, 

‘Now I will tell you the answer to my question It is this The Party seeks 
power entirely for its own sake. We are not interested in the good of others, we 
are interested solely in power Not wealth or luxury or long life or happiness 
only power, pure power What pure power means you will understand 
presently We are different from all the oligarchies of the past, m that we know 
what we are doing All the others, even those who resembled ourselves, were 
cowards and hypocrites The German Nazis and the Russian Communists 
came very close to us m their methods, but they never had the courage to 
recogmze their own motives They pretended, perhaps they even believed, 
that they had seized power unwillingly and for a limited time, and that just 
round the corner there lay a paradise where human beings would be free and 
equal We are not like that We know that no one ever seizes power with the 
intention of relinquishing it Power is not a means, it is an end. One does not 
establish a dictatorship in order to safeguard a revolution, one makes the 
revolution in order to establish the dictatorship. The object of persecution is 
persecution The object of torture is torture The object of power 1$ power 



8g6 Nineteen Eighty-F our 

Now do you begin to understand me 5 ’ 

Winston was struck, as he had been struck before, by the tiredness of 
O’Brien’s face It was strong and fleshy and brutal, it was full of intelligence 
and a sort of controlled passion before which he felt himself helpless but it was 
tired There were pouches under the eyes, the skin sagged from the 
cheekbones O’Brien leaned over him, deliberately bringing the worn face 
nearer 

‘You are thinking,’ he said, ‘that my face is old and tired You are thinking 
that I talk of power, and yet I am not even able to prevent the decay of my own 
body Can you not understand, Winston, that the individual is only a cell? The 
weariness of the cell is the vigour of the organism Do you die when you cut 
your fingernails?’ 

He turned away from the bed and began strolling up and down again, one 
hand in his pocket 

‘We are the priests of power,’ he said ‘ God is power But at present power is 
only a word so far as you are concerned It is time for you to gather some idea of 
what power means The first thing you must realize is that power is collective 
The mvididual only has power m so far as he ceases to be an individual You 
know the Party slogan “Freedom is Slavery” Has it ever occurred to you that 
it is reversible? Slavery is freedom Alone-free -the human being is always 
defeated It must be so, because every human being is doomed to die, which is 
the greatest of all failures But if he can make complete, utter submission, if he 
can escape from his identity, if he can merge himself m the Party so that he is 
the Party, then he is all-powerful and immortal The second thing for you to 
realize is that power is power over human beings Over the body-but, above 
all, over the mind Power over matter-external reality, as you would call lt-is 
not important Already our control over matter is absolute ’ 

For a moment Winston ignored the dial He made a violent effort to raise 
himself into a sitting position, and merely succeeded in wrenching his body 
painfully 

‘But how can you control matter?’ he burst out ‘You don’t even control the 
climate or the law of gravity And there are disease, pam, death-’ 

O’Brien silenced him by a movement of his hand ‘We control matter 
because we control the mind Reality is inside the skull You will learn by 
degrees, Winston There is nothing that we could not do Invisibility, 
levitation-anythmg I could float off this floor like a soap bubble if I wish to I 
do not wish to, because the Party does not wish it You must get rid of those 
nmeteenth-century ideas about the laws of Nature We make the laws of 
Nature,’ 

‘But you do not 1 You are not even masters of this planet What about Eurasia 
and Eastasia? You have not conquered them yet ’ 

‘'Unimportant, We shall conquer them when it suits us And if we did not, 
what difference would it make? We can shut them out of existence Oceania is 
the world.’ 

' ‘But the world itself is only a speck of dust And man is tiny-helpless* How 
longhas he been m existence? For millions of years the earth was uninhabited ’ 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 897 

‘Nonsense The earth is as old as we are, no older How could it be older? 
Nothing exists except through human consciousness ’ 

‘But the rocks are full of the bones of extinct ammals-mammoths and 
mastodons and enormous reptiles which lived here long before man was ever 
heard of 5 

‘Have you ever seen those bones, Winston? Of course not Nineteenth- 
century biologists invented them Before man there was nothing After man, if 
he could come to an end, there would be nothing Outside man there is 
nothing ’ 

‘But the whole universe is outside us Look at the stars’ Some of them are a 
million light-years away They are out of our reach for ever 5 

‘What are the stars?’ said O’Brien indifferently ‘They are bits of fire a few 
kilometres away We could reach them if we wanted to Or we could blot them 
out The earth is the centre of the universe The sun and the stars go round it ’ 

Winston made another convulsive movement This time he did not say 
anything O’Brien continued as though answering a spoken objection 

‘For certain purposes, of course, that is not true When we navigate the 
ocean, or when we predict an eclipse, we often find it convenient to assume that 
the earth goes round the sun and that the stars are millions upon millions of 
kilometres away But what of it? Do you suppose it is beyond us to produce a 
dual system of astronomy? The stars can be near or distant, according as we 
need them Do you suppose our mathematicians are unequal to that? Have you 
forgotten doublethink?’ 

Winston shrank back upon the bed Whatever he said, the swift answer 
crushed him like a bludgeon And yet he knew, he knew , that he was in the 
right The belief that nothing exists outside your own mmd-surely there must 
be some way of demonstrating that it was false? Had it not been exposed 
long ago as a fallacy? There was even a name for it, which he had forgotten 
A faint smile twitched the corners of O’Brien’s mouth as he looked down at 
him 

‘I told you, Winston,’ he said, ‘that metaphysics is not your strong point 
The word you are trying to think of is solipsism. But you are mistaken This is 
not solipsism Collective solipsism, if you like But that is a different thing in 
fact, the opposite thing All this is a digression,’ he added in a different tone 
‘The real power, the power we have to fight for night and day, is not power 
over things, but over men ’ He paused, and for a moment assumed again his air 
of a schoolmaster questioning a promising pupil ‘How does one man assert his 
power over another, Wmston?’ 

Winston thought ‘By making him suffer,’ he said 

‘Exactly. By making him suffer Obedience is not enough Unless he is 
suffering, how can you be sure that he is obeying your will and not his own? 
Power is in inflicting pain and humiliation. Power is in tearing human minds to 
pieces and putting them together again in new shapes of your own choosing. 
Do you begin to see, then, what kind of world we are creating? It is the exact 
opposite of the stupid hedonistic Utopias that the old reformers imagined A 
World of fear and treachery and torment, a world of trampling and being 



8g8 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

trampled upon, a world which will grow not less but moi e merciless as it refines 
itself Progress in our world will be progress towards more pain The old 
civilizations claimed that they were founded on love or justice Ours is founded 
upon hatred In our world there will be no emotions except fear, rage, 
triumph, and self-abasement Everything else we shall destroy- everything 
Already we are breaking down the habits of thought which have survived from 
before the Revolution We have cut the links between child and parent, and 
between man and man, and between man and woman No one dares trust a 
wife or a child or a friend any longer But in the future there will be no wives 
and no friends Children will be taken from their mothers at birth, as one takes 
eggs from a hen The sex instinct will be eradicated Procreation will be an 
annual formality like the renewal of a ration card We shall abolish the orgasm 
Our neurologists are at work upon it now There will be no loyalty, except 
loyalty towards the Party There will be no love, except the love of Big 
Brother There will be no laughter, except the laugh of triumph over a 
defeated enemy There will be no art, no literature, no science When we are 
omnipotent we shall have no more need of science There will be no distinction 
between beauty and ugliness There will be no curiosity, no enjoyment of the 
process of life All competing pleasures will be destroyed But always-do not 
forget this, Winston-always there will be the intoxication of power, constantly 
increasing and constantly growing subtler Always, at every moment, there 
will be the thrill of victory, the sensation of trampling on an enemy who is 
helpless If you want a picture of the future, imagine a boot stamping on a 
human face-for ever ’ 

He paused as though he expected Wmston to speak Winston had tried to 
shrink back into the surface of the bed again He could not say anything His 
heart seemed to be frozen O’Brien went on 

‘And remember that it is for ever The face will always be there to be 
stamped upon The heretic, the enemy of society, will always be there, so that 
he can be defeated and humiliated over again Everything that you have 
undergone since you have been m our hands-all that will continue, and worse 
The espionage, the betrayals, the arrests, the tortures, the executions, the 
disappearances will never cease It will be a world of terror as much as a world 
of triumph The more the Party is powerful, the less it will be tolerant the 
weaker the opposition, the tighter the despotism. Goldstein and his heresies 
will live for ever. Every day, at every moment, they will be defeated, 
discredited, ridiculed, spat upon-and yet they will always survive This drama 
that I have played out with you during seven years will be played out over and 
over again, generation after generation, always m subtler forms Always we 
shall have the heretic here at our mercy, screaming with pam, broken up, 
contemptible- and in the end utterly pemtent, saved from himself, crawling to 
our feet of his own accord. That is the world that we are preparing, Winston A 
woridof victory after victory, triumph after triumph after triumph an endless 
pressing, pressing, pressing upon the nerve of power You are beginning, I can 
Ste, foreafize what that world will be like But m the end you will do more than 
understand it. You will accept it, welcome it, become part of it.’ 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 899 

Winston had recovered himself sufficiently to speak ‘You can’t ' 5 he said 
weakly 

‘What do you mean by that remark, Winston?’ 

‘You could not create such a world as you have just described It is a dream 
It is impossible 5 
‘Why?’ 

‘It is impossible to found a civilization on fear and hatred and cruelty It 
would never endure 5 
‘Why not?’ 

‘It would have no vitality It would disintegrate It would commit suicide ’ 
‘Nonsense You are under the impression that hatred is more exhausting 
than love Why should it be? And if it were, what difference would that make? 
Suppose that we choose to wear ourselves out faster Suppose that we qmcken 
the tempo of human life till men are senile at thirty Still what difference would 
it make? Can you not understand that the death of the individual is not death? 
The Party is immortal ’ 

As usual, the voice had battered Winston into helplessness Moreover he 
was m dread that if he persisted m his disagreement O’Brien would twist the 
dial again And yet he could not keep silent Feebly, without arguments, with 
nothing to support him except his inarticulate horror of what O’Brien had 
said, he returned to the attack 

‘I don’t know-I don’t care Somehow you will fail Something will defeat 
you Life will defeat you ’ 

‘We control life, Winston, at all its levels You are imagining that there is 
something called human nature which will be outraged by what we do and will 
turn against us But we create human nature Men are infinitely malleable Or 
perhaps you have returned to your old idea that the proletarians or the slaves 
will arise and overthrow us Put it out of your mind They are helpless, like the 
animals Humanity is the Party The others are outside-irrelevant ’ 

‘I don’t care In the end they will beat you Sooner or later they will see you 
for what you are, and then they will tear you to pieces ’ 

‘Do you see any evidence that that is happening? Or any reason why it 
should?’ 

‘No I believe it I know that you will fail There is something in the 
universe - 1 don’t know, some spirit, some prmciple-that you will never 
overcome ’ 

‘Do you believe m God, Wmston?’ 

‘No’ 

‘Then what is it, this principle that will defeat us?’ 

‘I don’t know The spirit of Man ’ 

‘And do you consider yourself a man?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘If you are a man, Wmston, you are the last man Your kind is extinct, we are 
the inheritors Do you understand that you are alone* You are outside history, 
you are non-existent ’ His manner changed and he said more harshly ‘And 
you consider yourself morally superior to us } with our lies and our cruelty?’ 



poo Nineteen Eighty-Four 

‘Yes, I consider myself superior 1 

O’Brien did not speak Two other voices were speaking After a moment 
Winston recognized one of them as his own It was a sound-track of the 
conversation he had had with O’Brien, on the night when he had enrolled 
himself in the Brotherhood He heard himself promising to lie, to steal, to 
forge, to murder, to encourage drug-taking and prostitution, to disseminate 
venereal diseases, to throw vitriol m a child’s face O’Brien made a small 
impatient gesture, as though to say that the demonstration was hardly worth 
making Then he turned a switch and the voices stopped 
‘Get up from that bed,’ he said 

The bonds had loosened themselves Winston lowered himself to the floor 
and stood up unsteadily 

‘You are the last man,’ said O’Brien ‘You are the guardian of the human 
spirit You shall see yourself as you are Take off your clothes ’ 

Winston undid the bit of string that held his overalls together The zip 
fastener had long since been wrenched out of them He could not remember 
whether at any time since his arrest he had taken off all his clothes at one time 
Beneath the overalls his body was looped with filthy yellowish rags, just 
recognizable as the remnants of underclothes As he slid them to the ground he 
saw that there was a three-sided mirror at the far end of the room He 
approached it, then stopped short An involuntary cry had broken out of him 
‘Go on,’ said O’Brien ‘Stand between the wings of the mirror You shall see 
the side view as well ’ 

He had stopped because he was frightened A bowed, grey-coloured, 
skeleton-like thing was coming towards him Its actual appearance was 
frightening, and not merely the fact that he knew it to be himself He moved 
closer to the glass. The creature’s face seemed to be protruded, because of its 
bent carriage A forlorn, jailbird’s face with a nobby forehead running back 
into a bald scalp, a crooked nose, and battered-looking cheekbones above 
which the eyes were fierce and watchful The cheeks were seamed, the mouth 
had a drawn-in look Certainly it was his own face, but it seemed to him that it 
had changed more than he had changed inside The emotions it registered 
would be different from the ones he felt He had gone partially bald For the 
first moment he had thought that he had gone grey as well, but it was only the 
scalp that was grey. Except for his hands and a circle of his face, his body was 
grey all over with ancient, ingrained dirt. Here and there under the dirt there 
were the red scars of wounds, and near the ankle the varicose ulcer was an 
inflamed mass with flakes of skm peeling off it But the truly frightening thing 
was the emaciation of his body The barrel of the ribs was as narrow as that of a 
skeleton the legs had shrunk so that the knees were thicker than the thighs. He 
saw now what O’Brien had meant about seeing the side view The curvature of 
the spine was astonishing The thin shoulders were hunched forward so as to 
make a cavity of the chest, the scraggy neck seemed to be bending double 
under the weight of the skull At a guess he would have said that it was the 
body of a man of sixty, suffering from some malignant disease 
‘You have thought sometimes,’ said O’Brien, ‘that my face-the face of a 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 901 

member of the Inner Party-looks old and worn What do you think of your 
own face?’ 

He seized Winston’s shoulder and spun him round so that he was facing 
him 

‘Look at the condition you are m 1 ’ he said ‘Look at this filthy grime all over 
your body Look at the dirt between your toes Look at that disgusting running 
sore on your leg Do you know that you stmk like a goat? Probably you have 
ceased to notice it Look at your emaciation Do you see? I can make my thumb 
and forefinger meet round your bicep I could snap your neck like a carrot Do 
you know that you have lost twenty-five kilograms since you have been m our 
hands? Even your hair is coming out m handfuls Look' 5 He plucked at 
Winston’s head and brought away a tuft of hair ‘Open your mouth Nine, ten, 
eleven teeth left How many had you when you came to us? And the few you 
have left are dropping out of your head Look here 1 ’ 

He seized one of Winston’s remaining front teeth between his powerful 
thumb and forefinger A twinge of pain shot through Winston’s jaw O’Brien 
had wrenched the loose tooth out by the roots He tossed it across the cell 
‘You are rotting away,’ he said, ‘you are falling to pieces What are you? A 
bag of filth Now turn round and look into that mirror again Do you see that 
thing facing you?CThat is the last man If you are human, that is humanity 
Now put your clothes on again ^ 

Winston began to dress himself with slow stiff movements Until now he 
had not seemed to notice how thin and weak he was Only one thought stirred 
in his mind that he must have been in this place longer than he had imagined 
Then suddenly as he fixed the miserable rags round himself a feeling of pity for 
his ruined body overcame him Before he knew what he was doing he had 
collapsed on to a small stool that stood beside the bed and burst into tears He 
was aware of his ugliness, his gracelessness, a bundle of bones m filthy 
underclothes sitting weeping m the harsh white light but he could not stop 
himself O’Brien laid a hand on his shoulder, almost kindly 

‘It will not last for ever,’ he said ‘You can escape from it whenever you 
choose Everything depends on yourself ’ 

‘You did it 1 ’ sobbed Wmston ‘You reduced me to this state ’ 

‘No, Wmston, you reduced yourself to it This is what you accepted when 
you set yourself up against the Party It was all contained in that first act 
Nothing has happened that you did not foresee ’ 

He paused, and then went on 

‘We have beaten you, Wmston We have broken you up You have seen what 
your body is like Your mind is m the same state I do not think there can be 
much pride left in you You have been kicked and flogged and insulted, you 
have screamed with pam, you have rolled on the floor in your own blood and 
vomit You have whimpered for mercy, you have betrayed everybody and 
everything Can you think of a single degradation that has not happened to 
you?’ 

Winston had stopped weeping, though the tears were still oozing out of his 
eyes He looked up at O’Brien 



<)02 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

‘I have not betrayed Julia,’ he said 

O’Brien looked down at him thoughtfully ‘No,’ he said, ‘no, that is perfectly 
true You have not betrayed Julia ’ 

The peculiar reverence for O’Brien, which nothing seemed able to destroy, 
flooded Winston’s heart again How intelligent, he thought, how intelligent 1 
Never did O’Brien fail to understand what was said to him Anyone else on 
earth would have answered promptly that he had betrayed Julia For what was 
there that they had not sciewed out of him under the torture^ He had told them 
everything he knew about her, her habits, her character, her past life, he had 
confessed m the most trivial detail everything that had happened at their 
meetings, all that he had said to her and she to him, their black-market meals, 
their adulteries, their vague plottings against the Party-everything And yet, 
in the sense in which he intended the word, he had not betrayed her He had 
not stopped loving her, his feeling towards her had remained the same 
O’Brien had seen what he meant without the need for explanation 

‘Tell me,’ he said, ‘how soon will they shoot me ? ’ 

‘It might be a long time,’ said O’Brien ‘You are a difficult case But don’t 
give up hope Everyone is cured sooner or later In the end we shall shoot you ’ 


4 


He was much better He was growing fatter and stronger every day, if it was 
proper to speak of days 

The white light and the humming sound were the same as ever, but the cell 
was a little more comfortable than the others he had been m There was a 
pillow and a mattress on the plank bed, and a stool to sit on They had given 
him a bath, and they allowed him to wash himself fairly frequently m a tin 
basin They even gave him warm water to wash with They had given him new 
underclothes and a clean suit of overalls They had dressed his varicose ulcer 
with soothing ointment They had pulled out the remnants of his teeth and 
given him a new set of dentures 

Weeks or months must have passed It would have been possible now to 
keep count of the passage of time, if he had felt any interest in doing so, since 
he was being fed at what appeared to be regular intervals He was getting, he 
judged, three meals m the twenty-four hours, sometimes he wondered dimly 
whether he was getting them by night or by day The food was surprisingly 
good, with meat at every third meal Once there was even a packet of cigarettes 
Pe* W ho matches, but the never-speaking guard who brought his food would 
give him a light- The first time he toed to smoke it made him sick, but he 
|? 0 seyered, gad spun the packet out for a long time, smoking half a cigarette 



903 


Nineteen Eighty-Four 

They had given him a white slate with a stump of pencil tied to the corner 
At first he made no use of it Even when he was awake he was completely 
torpid Often he w'ould lie from one meal to the next almost without stirring, 
sometimes asleep, sometimes waking into vague reveries in which it was too 
much trouble to open his eyes He had long grown used to sleeping with a 
strong light on his face It seemed to make no difference, except that one’s 
dreams were more coherent He dreamed a great deal all through this time, and 
they were always happy dreams He was in the Golden Country, or he was 
sitting among enormous glorious, sunlit ruins, with his mother, with Julia, 
with O’Brien- not doing anything, merely sitting m the sun, talking of peaceful 
things Such thoughts as he had when he was awake were mostly about his 
dreams He seemed to have lost the power of intellectual effort, now that the 
stimulus of pain had been removed He was not bored, he had no desire for 
conversation or distraction Merely to be alone, not to be beaten or questioned, 
to have enough to eat, and to be clean all over, was completely satisfying 

By degrees he came to spend less time in sleep, but he still felt no impulse to 
get off the bed All he cared for was to lie qmet and feel the strength gathering 
m his body He would finger himself here and there, trying to make sure that it 
was not an illusion that his muscles were growing rounder and his skm tauter 
Finally it was established beyond a doubt that he was growing fatter, his thighs 
were now definitely thicker than his knees After that, reluctantly at first, he 
began exercising himself regularly In a little while he could walk three 
kilometres, measured by pacing the cell, and his bowed shoulders were 
growing straighter He attempted more elaborate exercises, and was 
astonished and humiliated to find what things he could not do He could not 
move out of a walk, he could not hold his stool out at arm’s length, he could not 
stand on one leg without falling over He squatted down on his heels, and 
found that with agonizing pains m thigh and calf he could just lift himself to a 
standing position He lay flat on his belly and tried to lift his weight by his 
hands It was hopeless, he could not raise himself a centimetre But after a few 
more days-a few more meal-times-even that feat was accomplished A time 
came when he could do it six times running He began to grow actually proud 
of his body, and to cherish an intermittent belief that his face also was growing 
back to normal Only when he chanced to put his hand on his bald scalp did he 
remember the seamed, ruined face that had looked back at him out of the 
mirror 

His mmd grew more active He sat down on the plank bed, his back against 
the wall and the slate on his knees, and set to work deliberately at the task of re- 
educating himself 

He had capitulated, that was agreed In reality, as he saw now, he had been 
ready to capitulate long before he had taken the decision From the moment 
when he was mside the Ministry of Love-and yes, even during those minutes 
when he and Julia had stood helpless while the iron voice from the telescreen 
told them what to do-he had grasped the frivolity, the shallowness of his 
attempt to set himself up against the power of the Party He knew now that for 
seven years the Thought Police had watched him like a beetle under a 



P04 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

magnifying glass There was no physical act, no word spoken aloud, that they 
had not noticed, no train of thought that they had not been able to infer Even 
the speck of whitish dust on the cover of his diary they had carefully replaced 
They had played sound-tracks to him, shown him photographs Some of them 
were photographs of Julia and himself Yes, even He could not fight 
against the Party any longer Besides, the Party was m the right It must be so 
how could the immortal, collective bram be mistaken’ By what external 
standard could you check its judgments’ Sanity was statistical It was merely a 
question of learning to think as they thought Only-* 

The pencil felt thick and awkward in his fingers He began to write down the 
thoughts that came mto his head He wrote first m large clumsy capitals 

FREEDOM IS SLAVERY 

Then almost without a pause he wrote beneath it 

TWO AND TWO MAKE FIVE 

But then there came a sort of check His mmd, as though shying away from 
something, seemed unable to concentrate He knew that he knew what came 
next, but for the moment he could not recall it When he did recall it, it was 
only by consciously reasoning out what it must be it did not come of its own 
accord He wrote* 


GOD IS POWER 

He accepted everything The past was alterable The past never had been 
altered Oceania was at war with Eastasia Oceania had always been at war with 
Eastasia Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford were guilty of the crimes they were 
charged with He had never seen the photograph that disproved their guilt It 
had never existed, he had invented it He remembered remembering contrary 
things, but those were false memories, products of self-deception How easy it 
all wasl Only surrender, and everything else followed It was like swimming 
against a current that swept you backwards however hard you struggled, and 
then suddenly deciding to turn round and go with the current instead of 
opposing it. Nothing had changed except your own attitude the predestined 
thing happened in any case. He hardly knew why he had ever rebelled 
Everything was easy, except-] 

Anything could be true. The so-called laws of Nature were nonsense The 
law of gravity was nonsense ‘If I wished,’ O’Brien had said, ‘I could float off 
this floor like a soap bubble,’ Winston worked it out ‘If he thinks he floats off 
tfee flQor, andif I simultaneously thmk K l see him do it, then the thing happens ’ 
Suddenly, Ike a lump of submerged wreckage breaking the surface of water, 
the thought* burst into his mind ‘It doesn’t really happen We imagine it It is 
i^lucmaiion,’ He pushed the thought under instantly The fallacy was 
bh%OUs, It presupposed that somewhere or other, outside oneself, there was a 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 905 

real world where ‘real’ things happened But how could there be such a 
world - 1 What knowledge have we of anything, save through our own minds - 1 
All happenings are m the mind Whatever happens in all mmds, truly happens 
He had no difficulty in disposing of the fallacy, and he was in no danger of 
succumbing to it He realized, nevertheless, that it ought never to have 
occurred to him The mmd should develop a blind spot whenever a dangerous 
thought presented itself The process should be automatic, instinctive 
Cnmestop, they called it m Newspeak 
He set to work to exercise himself m cnmestop He presented himself with 
propositions- ‘the Party says the earth is flat’, ‘the Party says that ice is heavier 
than water’— and tramed himself in not seemg or not understanding the 
arguments that contradicted them It was not easy It needed great powers of 
reasoning and improvisation The arithmetical problems raised, for instance, 
by such a statement as ‘two and two make five’ were beyond his intellectual 
grasp It needed also a sort of athleticism of mmd, and ability at one moment to 
make the most delicate use of logic and at the next to be unconscious of the 
crudest logical errors Stupidity was as necessary as intelligence, and as 
difficult to attain 

All the while, with one part of his mind, he wondered how soon they would 
shoot him ‘Everything depends on yourself,’ O’Brien had said, but he knew 
that there was no conscious act by which he could bring it nearer It might be 
ten minutes hence, or ten years They might keep him for years m solitary 
confinement, they might send him to a labour-camp, they might release him 
for a while, as they sometimes did It was perfectly possible that before he was 
shot the whole drama of his arrest and mterrogation would be enacted all over 
again The one certain thing was that death never came at an expected 
moment The tradition-the unspoken tradition somehow you knew it, though 
you never heard it said-was that they shot you from behind* always in the back 
of the head, without warning, as you walked down a corridor from cell to cell 
One day— but ‘one day’ was not the right expression, just as probably it was 
in the middle of the night: once-he fell into a strange, blissful reverie He was 
walking down the corridor, waiting for the bullet He knew that it was coming 
m another moment Everything was settled, smoothed out, reconciled There 
were no more doubts, no more arguments, no more pam, no more fear His 
body was healthy and strong He walked easily, with a joy of movement and 
with a feelmg of walking m sunlight He was not any longer m the narrow 
white corridors in the Ministry of Love, he was in the enormous sunlit 
passage, a kilometre wide, down which he had seemed to walk in the delirium 
induced by drugs He was in the Golden Country, following the foot-track 
across the old rabbit-cropped pasture He could feel the short springy turf 
under his feet and the gentle sunshine on his face At the edge of the field were 
the elm trees, faintly stirring, and somewhere beyond that was the stream 
where the dace lay in the green pools under the willows. 

Suddenly he started up with a shock of horror The sweat broke out on his 
backbone He hacfheard himself cry aloud: 

‘Julia* Juba* Jnha* my levef JpMaP - 



po6 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

For a moment he had had an overwhelming hallucination of her presence 
She had seemed to be not merely with him, but inside him It was as though 
she had got into the texture of his skin In that moment he had loved her far 
more than he had ever done when they were together and free Also he knew 
that somewhere or other she was still alive and needed his help 

He lay back on the bed and tried to compose himself What had he done^ 
How many years had he added to his servitude by that moment of weakness^ 5 

In another moment he would hear the tramp of boots outside They could 
not let such an outburst go unpunished They would know now, if they had not 
known before, that he was breaking the agreement he had made with them He 
obeyed the Party, but he still hated the Party In the old days he had hidden a 
heretical mind beneath an appearance of conformity Now he had retreated a 
step further m the mind he had surrendered, but he had hoped to keep the 
inner heart inviolate He knew that he was m the wrong, but he preferred to be 
m the wrong They would understand that- O’Brien would understand it It 
was all confessed in that single foolish cry 

He would have to start all over again It might take years He ran a hand over 
his face, trying to familiarize himself with the new shape There were deep 
furrows in the cheeks, the cheekbones felt sharp, the nose flattened Besides, 
since last seeing himself in the glass he had been given a complete new set of 
teeth It was not easy to preserve inscrutability when you did not know what 
your face looked like In any case, mere control of the features was not enough 
For the first time he perceived that if you want to keep a secret you must also 
hide it from yourself You must know all the while that it is there, but until it is 
needed you must never let it emerge into your consciousness in any shape that 
could be given a name From now onwards he must not only think right, he 
must feel right, dream right And all the while he must keep his hatred locked 
up inside him like a ball of matter which was part of himself and yet 
unconnected with the rest of him, a kind of cyst 

One day they would decide to shoot him You could not tell when it would 
happen, but a few seconds beforehand it should be possible to guess It was 
always from behind, walking down a corridor Ten seconds would be enough 
In that time the world inside him could turn over And then suddenly, without 
a word uttered, without a check m his step, without the changing of a line m his 
face-suddenly the camouflage would be down and bang' would go the 
batteries of his hatred Hatred would fill him like an enormous roaring flame 
And almost in the same instant bang' would go the bullet, too late, or too early 
They would have blown his brain to pieces before they could reclaim it The 
heretical thought would be unpunished, unrepented, out of their reach for 
ever They would have blown a hole m their own perfection To die hating 
them, that was freedom. 

He shut his eyes. It was more difficult than accepting an intellectual 
discipline. It was a question of degrading himself, mutilating himself He had 
got to plunge Into the filthiest of filth What was the most horrible, sickening 
thing of all? He thought of Big Brother The enormous face (because of 
constantly seeing it on posters he always thought of it as being a metre wide), 



Nineteen Eighty-Four P07 

with its heavy black moustache and the eyes that followed you to and fro, 
seemed to float into his mmd of its own accord What were his true feelings 
towards Big Brother? 

There was a heavy tramp of boots in the passage The steel door swung open 
with a clang O Bnen walked into the cell Behind him were the waxen-faced 
officer and the black-uniformed guards 
‘Get up,’ said O’Brien ‘Come here * 

Winston stood opposite him O Bnen took Winston’s shoulders between his 
strong hands and looked at him closely 
‘You have had thoughts of deceiving me, 5 he said ‘That was stupid Stand 
up straighter Look me m the face ’ 

He paused, and went on m a gentler tone 

You are improving Intellectually there is very little wrong with you It is 
only emotionally that you have failed to make progress Tell me, Wmston-and 
remember, no lies you know thatj am always able to detect a lie-tell me, what 
are your true feelings towards Big Brother?’ 

‘I hate him ’ 

‘You hate him Good Then the time has come for you to take the last step 
You must love Big Brother It is not enough to obey him you must love him ’ 
He released Winston with a little push towards the guards 
‘Room 101,’ he said 


5 


At each stage of his imprisonment he had known, or seemed to know, 
whereabouts he was m the windowless building Possibly there were slight 
differences in the air pressure The cells where the guards had beaten him were 
below ground level The room where he had been interrogated by O’Brien was 
high up near the roof- This place was many metres underground, as deep down 
as it was possible to go 

It was bigger than most of the cells he had been in But he hardly noticed his 
surroundings All he noticed was that there were two small tables straight in 
front of him, each covered with green baize One was only a metre or two from 
him, the other was farther away, near the door He was strapped upright m a 
chair, so tightly that he could move nothing, not even his head- A sort of pad 
gripped his head from behind, forcing him to look straight in front of him. 

For a moment he was alone, then the door opened and O’Brien came mu 

‘You asked me once,’ said O’Brien, ‘what was in Room 101 , 1 told you that 
you knew the answer already. Everyone knows it. The thing that is in Room 
1 01 is the worst thing m the world ’ 

The door opened again. A guard came In, carrying something made of wire. 



go8 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

a box or basket of some kind He set it down on the further table Because of 
the position m which O’Brien was standing, Winston could not see what the 
thing was 

‘The worst thing m the world,’ said O’Brien, ‘vanes from individual to 
individual It may be burial alive, or death by fire, or by drowning, or by 
impalement, or fifty other deaths There are cases where it is some quite trivial 
thing, not even fatal ’ 

He had moved a little to one side, so that Wmston had a better view of the 
thing on the table It was an oblong wire cage with a handle on top for carrying 
it by Fixed to the front of it was something that looked like a fencing mask, 
with the concave side outwards Although it was three or four metres away 
from him, he could see that the cage was divided lengthways into two 
compartments, and that there was some kind of creature in each They were 
rats 

‘In your case,’ said O’Brien, ‘the worst thing m the world happened to be 
rats ’ 

A sort of premonitory tremor, a fear of he was not certain what, had passed 
through Winston as soon as he caught his first glimpse of the cage But at this 
moment the meaning of the mask-like attachment in front of it suddenly sank 
into him His bowels seemed to turn to water 

‘You can’t do that 1 ’ he cried out m a high cracked voice ‘You couldn’t, you 
couldn’t 1 It’s impossible ’ 

‘Do you remember,’ said O’Brien, ‘the moment of panic that used to occur 
m your dreams? There was a wall of blackness in front of you, and a roaring 
sound in your ears There was something terrible on the other side of the wall 
Y ou knew that you knew what it was, but you dared not drag it into the open It 
was the rats that were on the other side of the wall ’ 

‘O’Brien 1 ’ said Wmston, making an effort to control his voice ‘You know 
this is not necessary What is it that you want me to do?’ 

O’Brien made no direct answer When he spoke it was in the 
schoolmasterish manner that he sometimes affected He looked thoughtfully 
into the distance, as though he were addressing an audience somewhere behind 
Winston’s back 

‘By itself,’ he said, c pam is not always enough There are occasions when a 
human being will stand out against pain, even to the point of death But for 
everyone there is something unendurable -something that cannot be 
contemplated Courage and cowardice are not involved If you are falling from 
a height it is not cowardly to clutch at a rope If you have come up from deep 
water it is not cowardly to fill your lungs with air It is merely an instinct which 
cannot be destroyed It is the same with the rats For you, they are 
unendurable. They are a form of pressure that you cannot withstand, even if 
you wished to You will do what is required of you ’ 

‘But what is it, what is it? How can I do it if I don’t know what it is?’ 

0’Bnen packed up the cage and brought it across to the nearer table He set it 
down carefully on the baize cloth Winston could hear the blood singing in his 
eatisl He had the feeling of sittmg in utter loneliness He was m the middle of a 



Nineteen Eighty-Four pop 

great empty plain, a flat desert drenched with sunlight, across which all sounds 
came to him out of immense distances Y et the cage with the rats was not two 
metres away from him They were enormous rats They were at the age when a 
rat’s muzzle grows blunt and fierce and his fur brown instead of grey 

The rat, said O Brien, still addressing his invisible audience, ‘although a 
rodent, is carnivorous You are aware of that You will have heard of the things 
that happen in the poor quarters of this town In some streets a woman dare 
not leave her baby alone in the house, even for five minutes The rats are 
certain to attack it Within quite a small time they will strip it to the bones 
They also attack sick or dying people They show astonishing intelligence in 
knowing when a human being is helpless ’ 

There was an outburst of squeals from the cage It seemed to reach Winston 
from far away The rats were fighting, they were trying to get at each other 
through the partition He heard also a deep groan of despair That, too, seemed 
to come from outside himself 

O’Brien picked up the cage, and, as he did so, pressed something m it There 
was a sharp click Winston made a frantic effort to tear himself loose from the 
chair It was hopeless, every part of him, even his head, was held immovably 
O’Brien moved the cage nearer It was less than a metre from Winston’s face 
‘I have pressed the first lever,’ said O’Brien ‘You understand the 
construction of this cage The mask will fit over your head, leaving no exit 
When I press this other lever, the door of the cage will slide up These starving 
brutes will shoot out of it like bullets Have you ever seen a rat leap through the 
air? They will leap on to your face and bore straight into it Sometimes they 
attack the eyes first Sometimes they burrow through the cheeks and devour 
the tongue ’ 

The cage was nearer, it was closing m Winston heard a succession of shrill 
cries which appeared to be occurring in the air above his head But he fought 
furiously against his panic To think, to think, even with a split second left- to 
think was the only hope Suddenly the foul musty odour of the brutes struck his 
nostrils There was a violent convulsion of nausea inside him, and he almost 
lost consciousness. Everything had gone black For an instant he was insane, a 
screaming animal Yet he came out of the blackness clutching an idea There 
was one and only one way to save himself He must interpose another human 
being, the body of another human being, between himself and the rats 

The circle of the mask was large enough now to shut out the vision of 
anything else The wire door was a couple of hand-spans from his face The 
rats knew what was coming now One of them was leaping up and down, the 
other, an old scaly grandfather of the sewers, stood up, with the other his pink 
hands against the bars, and fiercely sniffed the air Winston could see the 
whiskers and the yellow teeth Again the black panic took hold of him He was 
blind, helpless, mindless 

‘It was a common punishment m Imperial China,’ said O’Brien as 
didactically as ever 

The mask was closing on his face The wire brushed his cheek. And 
then-no, it was not relief, only hope, a tiny fragment of hope Too late, 



9 jo Nineteen Eighty-Four 

perhaps too late But he had suddenly understood that in the whole world 
there was just one person to whom he could transfer his punishment-one body 
that he could thrust between himself and the rats And he was shouting 
frantically, over and over 

c Do it to Julia 1 Do it to Julia 1 Not me* Julia I don’t care what you do to her 
Tear her face off, strip her to the bones Not me* Julia* Not me*’ 

He was falling backwards, into enormous depths, away from the rats He 
was still strapped m the chair, but he had fallen through the floor, through the 
walls of the building, through the earth, through the oceans, through the 
atmosphere, into outer space, into the gulfs between the stars-always away, 
away, away from the rats He was light-years distant, but O’Brien was still 
standing at his side There was still the cold touch of a wire against his cheek 
But through the darkness that enveloped him he heard another metallic click, 
and knew that the cage door had clicked shut and not open 


6 


The Chestnut Tree was almost empty A ray of sunlight slanting through a 
window fell yellow on dusty table-tops It was the lonely hour of fifteen A 
tinny music trickled from the telescreens 

Winston sat in his usual corner, gazing into an empty glass Now and again 
he glanced up at a vast face which eyed him from the opposite wall big 
brother is watching you, the caption said Unbidden, a waiter came and filled 
his glass up with Victory Gm, shaking into it a few drops from another bottle 
with a quill through the cork It was saccharine flavoured with cloves, the 
speciality of the caffe 

Winston was listening to the telescreen At present only music was coming 
out of it, but there was a possibility that at any moment there might be a special 
bulletin from the Ministry of Peace The news from the African front was 
disquieting m the extreme On and off he had been worrying about it all day A 
Eurasian army (Oceama was at war with Eurasia. Oceania had always been at 
war with Eurasia) was moving southward at terrifying speed The midday 
bulletin had not mentioned any definite area, but it was probable that already 
the mouth of the Congo was a battlefield Brazzaville and Leopoldville were in 
danger One did not have to look at the map to see what it meant It was not 
merely a question of losing Central Africa, for the first time in the whole war, 
the territory of Oceania itself was menaced 

1 A violent emotions not fear exactly but a sort of undifferentiated excitement, 
flared up in him, then faded again He stopped thinking about the war. In these 
days he could never fix his mind on any one subject for more than a few 
moments at a time. He picked up his glass and drained it at a gulp. As always. 



Nineteen Eighty-Four p j z 

the gm made him shudder and even retch slightly The stuff was horrible The 
cloves and saccharine, themselves disgusting enough m their sickly way, could 
not disguise the flat oily smell, and what was worst of all was that the smell of 
gm, which dwelt with him night and day, was inextricably mixed up in his 
mind with the smell of those- 

He never named them, even in his thoughts, and so far as it was possible he 
never visualized them They were something that he was half-aware of, 
hovering close to his face, a smell that clung to his nostrils As the gm rose m 
him he belched through purple lips He had grown fatter since they released 
him, and had regained his old colour— indeed, more than regained it His 
features had thickened, the skin on nose and cheekbones was coarsely red, even 
the bald scalp was too deep a pink A waiter, again unbidden, brought the 
chessboard and the current issue of The Times , with the page turned down at 
the chess problem Then, seeing that Winston’s glass was empty, he brought 
the gm bottle and filled it There was no need to give orders They knew his 
habits The chessboard was always waiting for him, his corner table was always 
reserved, even when the place was full he had it to himself, since nobody cared 
to be seen sitting too close to him He never even bothered to count his drinks 
At irregular intervals they presented him with a dirty slip of paper which they 
said was the bill, but he had the impression that they always undercharged 
him It would have made no difference if it had been the other way about He 
had always plenty of money nowadays He even had a job, a sinecure, more 
highly paid than his old job had been 

The music from the telescreen stopped and a voice took over Winston 
raised his head to listen No bulletin from the front, however It was merely a 
brief announcement from the Ministry of Plenty In the preceding quarter, it 
appeared, the Tenth Three-Year Plan’s quota for bootlaces had been over- 
fulfilled by 98 per cent 

He examined the chess problem and set out the pieces It was a tucky 
ending, involving a couple of knights ‘White to play and mate m two moves ’ 
Winston looked up at the portrait of Big Brother White always mates, he 
thought with a sort of cloudy mysticism Always, without exception, it is so 
arranged In no chess problem since the beginning of the world has black ever 
won Did it not symbolize the eternal, unvarying triumph of Good over EviP 
The huge face gazed back at him, full of calm power White always mates 

The voice from the telescreen paused and added m a different and much 
graver tone ‘You are warned to stand by for an important announcement at 
fifteen-thirty Fifteen-thirty 1 This is news of the highest importance Take 
care not to miss it Fifteen-thirty 1 ’ The tinkling music struck up again 

Winston’s heart stirred That was the bulletin from the front; instinct told 
him that it was bad news that was coming All day, with little spurts of 
excitment, the thought of a smashing defeat in Africa had been in and out of his 
mind He seemed actually to see the Eurasian army swarming across the never- 
broken frontier and pouring down into the tip of Africa like a column of ants 
Why had it not been possible to outflank themin some way? The outline of the 
West African coast stood out vividly in his?immd, He picked up the white 



5>/2 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

knight and moved it across the board There was the proper spot Even while 
he saw the black horde racing southward he saw another force, mysteriously 
assembled, suddenly planted in their rear, cutting their communications by 
land and sea He felt that by willing it he was bringing that other force into 
existence But it was necessary to act quickly If they could get control of the 
whole of Africa, if they had airfields and submarine bases at the Cape, it would 
cut Oceania m two It might mean anything defeat, breakdown, the redivision 
of the world, the destruction of the Party 1 He drew a deep breath An 
extraordinary medley of feeling~but it was not a medley, exactly, rather it was 
successive layers of feeling, m which one could not say which layer was 
undermost-struggled inside him 

The spasm passed He put the white knight back m its place, but for the 
moment he could not settle down to serious study of the chess problem His 
thoughts wandered again Almost unconsciously he traced with his finger m 
the dust on the table 


2 + 2 = 

‘They can’t get inside you,’ she had said But they could get inside you 
‘What happens to you here is for everf O’Brien had said That was a true word 
There were things, your own acts, from which you could not recover 
Something was killed in your breast burnt out, cauterized out. 

He had seen her, he had even spoken to her There was no danger m it He 
knew as though instinctively that they now took almost no interest m his 
doings He could have arranged to meet her a second time if either of them had 
wanted to Actually it was by chance that they had met It was m the Park, on a 
vile, biting day m March, when the earth was like iron and all the grass seemed 
dead and there was not a bud anywhere except a few crocuses which had 
pushed themselves up to be dismembered by the wind He was hurrying along 
with frozen hands and watering eyes when he saw her not ten metres away 
from him It struck him at once that she had changed m some ill-defined way 
They almost passed one another without a sign, then he turned and followed 
her, not very eagerly He knew that there was no danger, nobody would take 
any interest m them She did not speak She walked obliquely away across the 
grass as though trying to get rid of him, then seemed to resign herself to having 
him at her side Presently they were in among a clump of ragged leafless 
shrubs, useless either for concealment or as protection from the wind They 
halted It was vilely cold The wind whistled through the twigs and fretted the 
occasional, dirty-looking crocuses He put his arm round her waist 

There was no telescreen, but there must be hidden microphones besides, 
they could be seen It did not matter, nothing mattered They could have lam 
down on the ground and done that if they had wanted to His flesh froze with 
horror at the thought of it She made no response whatever to the clasp of his 
arm, she did not even try to disengage herself He knew now what had changed 
mher, Her face was sallower, and there was a long scar, partly hidden by the 
half, across ter forehead and temple, but that was not the change* It was that 



Nineteen Eighty-Four pj j 

her waist had grown thicker, and, m a surprising way, had stiffened He 
remembered how once, after the explosion of a rocket bomb, he had helped to 
drag a corpse out of some rums, and had been astonished not only by the 
incredible weight of the thing, but by its rigidity and awkwardness to handle, 
which made it seem more like stone than flesh Her body felt like that It 
occurred to him that the texture of her skin would be quite different from what 
it had once been 

He did not attempt to kiss her, nor did they speak As they walked back 
across the grass she looked directly at him for the first time It was only a 
momentary glance, full of contempt and dislike He wondered whether it was a 
dislike that came purely out of the past or whether it was inspired also by his 
bloated face and the water that the wind kept squeezmg from his eyes They sat 
down on two iron chairs, side by side but not too close together He saw that 
she was about to speak She moved her clumsy shoe a few centimetres and 
deliberately crushed a twig Her feet seemed to have grown broader, he 
noticed 

‘I betrayed you,’ she said baldly 

T betrayed you,’ he said 

She gave him another quick look of dislike 

‘Sometimes,’ she said, ‘they threaten you with something-something you 
can’t stand up to, can’t even think about And then you say, “Don’t do it to me, 
do it to somebody else, do it to So-and-so ” And perhaps you might pretend, 
afterwards, that it was only a trick and that you just said it to make them stop 
and didn’t really mean it But that isn’t true At the time when it happens you 
do mean it You think there’s no other way of saving yourself, and you’re quite 
ready to save yourself that way You want it to happen to the other person You 
don’t give a damn what they suffer All you care about is yourself ’ 

‘All you care about is yourself,’ he echoed 

‘And after that, you don’t feel the same towards the other person any 
longer ’ 

‘No,’ he said, ‘you don’t feel the same ’ 

There did not seem to be anything more to say The wind plastered their 
thin overalls against their bodies Almost at once it became embarrassing to sit 
there m silence besides, it was too cold to keep still She said something about 
catching her Tube and stood up to go 

‘We must meet again,’ he said 

‘Yes,’ she said, ‘we must meet again ’ 

He followed irresolutely for a little distance, half a pace behind her They 
did not speak again She did not actually try to shake him off, but walked at just 
such a speed as to prevent his keeping abreast of her He had made up his mind 
that he would accompany her as far as the Tube station, but suddenly this 
process of trailing along in the cold seemed pointless and unbearable He was 
overwhelmed by a desire not so much to get away from Julia as to get back to 
the Chestnut Tree Cafe, which had never seemed so attractive as at this 
moment He had a nostalgic vision of his corner table, with the newspaper and 
the chessboard, and the everflowing gip. Above all, it would, be warm m there*. 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 

The next moment, not altogether by accident, he allowed himself to become 
separated from her by a small knot of people He made a half-hearted attempt 
to catch up, then slowed down, turned, and made off m the opposite direction 
When he had gone fifty metres he looked back The street was not crowded, 
but already he could not distinguish her Any one of a dozen hurrying figures 
might have been hers Perhaps her thickened, stiffened body was no longer 
recognizable from behind 

‘At the time when it happens , 5 she had said, ‘you do mean it 5 He had meant 
it He had not merely said it, he had wished it He had wished that she and not 
he should be delivered over to the- 

Something changed m the music that trickled from the telescreen A cracked 
and jeering note, a yellow note, came into it And then-perhaps it was not 
happening, perhaps it was only a memory taking on the semblance of sound-a 
voice was singing 


‘Under the spreading chestnut tree 
I sold you and you sold me-’ 

The tears welled up m his eyes A passing waiter noticed that his glass was 
empty and came back with the gm bottle 

He took up his glass and sniffed at it The stuff grew not less but more 
horrible with every mouthful he drank But it had become the element he 
swam m It was his life, his death, and his resurrection It was gm that sank 
him into stupor every night, and gm that revived him every morning When he 
woke, seldom before eleven hundred, with gummed-up eyelids and fiery 
mouth and a back that seemed to be broken, it would have been impossible 
even to rise from the horizontal if it had not been for the bottle and teacup 
placed beside the bed overnight Through the midday hours he sat with glazed 
face, the bottle handy, listening to the telescreen From fifteen to closing-time 
he was a fixture in the Chestnut Tree No one cared what he did any longer, no 
whistle woke him, no telescreen admonished him Occasionally, perhaps twice 
a week, he went to a dusty, forgotten-looking office in the Ministry of Truth 
and did a little work, or what was called work He had been appointed to a sub- 
committee of a sub-commrtee which had sprouted from one of the 
innumerable committees dealing with minor difficulties that arose in the 
compilation of the Eleventh Edition of the Newspeak Dictionary, They were 
engaged in producing something called an Interim Report, but what it was that 
they were reporting on he had never definitely found out It was something to 
do with the question of whether commas should be placed inside brackets, or 
outside. There were four others on the committee, all of them persons similar 
to himself There were days when they assembled and then promptly 
dispersed again, frankly admitting to one another that there was not really 
anything to be done But there were other days when they settled down to their 
work almost eagerly, making a tremendous show of entering up their minutes 
and drafting long memoranda which were never finished- when the argument 
as to what they were supposedly arguing about grew extraordinarily involved 
and abstruse, with subtle hagglmgs over definitions, enormous digressions. 



Nineteen Eighty-Four p j 5 

quarrels-threats, even, to appeal to higher authority And then suddenly the 
life would go out of them and they would sit round the table looking at one 
another with extinct eyes, like ghosts fading at cock-crow 

The telescreen was silent for a moment Winston raised his head again The 
bulletin' But no, they were merely changing the music He had the map of 
Africa behind his eyelids The movement of the armies was a diagram a black 
arrow tearing vertically southward, and a white arrow tearing horizontally 
eastward, across the tail of the first As though for reassurance he looked up at 
the imperturbable face in the portrait Was it conceivable that the second 
arrow did not even exist? 

His interest flagged again He drank another mouthful of gin, picked up the 
white knight and made a tentative move Check But it was evidently not the 
right move, because- 

Uncalled, a memory floated into his mind He saw a candle-lit room with a 
vast white-counterpaned bed, and himself, a boy of nme or ten, sitting on the 
floor, shaking a dice-box, and laughing excitedly His mother was sitting 
opposite him and also laughing 

It must have been about a month before she disappeared It was a moment of 
reconciliation, when the nagging hunger m his belly was forgotten and his 
earlier affection for her had temporarily revived He remembered the day well, 
a pelting, drenching day when the water streamed down the window-pane and 
the light indoors was too dull to read by The boredom of the two children in 
the dark, cramped bedroom became unbearable Winston whined and 
grizzled, made futile demands for food, fretted about the room pulling 
everything out of place and kicking the wainscoting until the neighbours 
banged on the wall, while the younger child wailed intermittently In the end 
his mother had said, ‘Now be good, and I’ll buy you a toy A lovely toy-you’ll 
love it’, and then she had gone out in the ram, to a little general shop which was 
still sporadically open near by, and came back with a cardboard box containing 
an outfit of Snakes and Ladders He could still remember the smell of the 
damp cardboard It was a miserable outfit The board was cracked and the tiny 
wooden dice were so ill-cut that they would hardly lie on their sides Winston 
looked at the thing sulkily and without interest But then his mother lit a piece 
of candle and they sat down on the floor to play Soon he was wildly excited 
and shouting with laughter as the tiddlywinks climbed hopefully up the 
ladders and then came slithering down the snakes again, almost to the starting- 
point They played eight games, winning four each His tiny sister, too young 
to understand what the game was about, had sat propped up against a bolster, 
laughing because the others were laughing For a whole afternoon they had all 
been happy together, as in his earlier childhood 

He pushed the picture out of his mind It was a false memory* He was 
troubled by false memories occasionally, They did not matter so long as one 
knew them for what they were Some things had happened, others had not 
happened He turned back to the chessboard and picked up the white knight 
again, Almost m the same instant it dropped on to the board with a clatter. He 
had started as though a pm had run into him 



9 1 6 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

A shrill trumpet call had pierced the air It was the bulletin 1 Victory 1 It 
always meant victory when a trumpet call preceded the news A sort of electric 
thrill ran through the cafe Even the waiters had started and pricked up their 
ears 

The trumpet call had let loose an enormous volume of noise Already an 
excited voice was gabbling from the telescreen, but even as it started it was 
almost drowned by a roar of cheering from outside The news had run round 
the streets like magic He could hear just enough of what was issuing from the 
telescreen to realize that it had all happened as he had foreseen a vast seaborne 
armada secretly assembled, a sudden blow in the enemy’s rear, the white arrow 
tearing across the tail of the black Fragments of triumphant phrases pushed 
themselves through the dm ‘Vast strategic manoeuvre- perfect co- 
ordination-utter rout-half a million prisoners-complete demoralization- 
control of the whole of Africa-bring the war within measurable distance of its 
end- victory- greatest victory in human history- victory, victory, victory 1 ’ 

Under the table Winston’s feet made convulsive movements He had not 
stirred from his seat, but m his mind he was running, swiftly running, he was 
with the crowds outside, cheering himself deaf He looked up again at the 
portrait of Big Brother The colossus that bestrode the world 1 The rock against 
which the hordes of Asia dashed themselves m vam’ He thought how ten 
minutes ago-yes, only ten minutes -there had still been equivocation m his 
heart as he wondered whether the news from the front would be of victory or 
defeat Ah, it was more than a Eurasian army that had perished’ Much had 
changed in him since that first day in the Ministry of Love, but the final, 
indispensable, healing change had never happened, until this moment 

The voice from the telescreen was still pouring forth its tale of prisoners and 
booty and slaughter, but the shouting outside had died down a little The 
waiters were turning back to their work. One of them approached with the gm 
bottle, Winston, sitting in a blissful dream, paid no attention as his glass was 
filled up He was not running or cheering any longer He was back m the 
Ministry of Love, with everything foi given, his soul white as snow He was m 
the public dock, confessing everything, implicating everybody He was 
walking down the white-tiled corridor, with the feeling of walking m sunlight, 
and an armed guard at his back. The long-hoped-for bullet was entering his 
brain 

He gazed up at the enormous face Forty years it had taken him to learn what 
kind of smile was hidden beneath the dark moustache O cruel, needless 
misunderstanding’ O stubborn, self-willed exile from the loving breast’ Two 
gm-scented tears trickled down the sides of his nose But it was all right, 
everything was all right, the struggle was finished, He had won the victory over 
himself He loved Big Brother 


THE END 



APPENDIX 


The Principles of Newspeak 

Newspeak was the official language of Oceania and had been devised to meet 
the ideological needs of Ingsoc, or English Socialism In the year 1984 there 
was not as yet anyone who used Newspeak as his sole means of 
communication., either m speech or writing The leading articles in The Times 
were written in it, but this was a tour de force which could only be carried out 
by a specialist It was expected that Newspeak would have finally superseded 
Oldspeak (or Standard English, as we should call it) by about the year 2050 
Meanwhile it gamed ground steadily, all Party members tending to use 
Newspeak words and grammatical constructions more and more in their 
everyday speech The version m use in 1984, and embodied in the Ninth and 
Tenth Editions of the Newspeak Dictionary, was a provisional one, and 
contained many superfluous words and archaic formations which were due to 
be suppressed later It is with the final, perfected version, as embodied in the 
Eleventh Edition of the Dictionary, that we are concerned here 
The purpose of Newspeak was not only to provide a medium of expression 
for the world-view and mental habits proper to the devotees of Ingsoc, but to 
make all other modes of thought impossible It was intended that when 
Newspeak had been adopted once and for all and Oldspeak forgotten, a 
heretical thought-that is, a thought diverging from the principles of 
Ingsoc-should be literally unthinkable, at least so far as thought is dependent 
on words Its Vocabulary was so constructed as to give exact and often very 
subtle expression to every meaning that a Party member could properly wish 
to express, while excluding all other meanings and also the possibility of 
arriving at them by indirect methods This was done partly by the invention of 
new words, but chiefly by eliminating undesirable words and by stripping 
such words as remained of unorthodox meanings, and so far as possible of all 
secondary meanings whatever To give a single example The word free still 
existed m Newspeak, but it could only be usedm such statements as ‘This dog 
is free from lice 5 or This field is free from weeds’ It could not beusedmits old 
sense ofl ‘politically free’ or ‘intellectually free’, since political and mtellectual 
freedom ho hmg^^dsteci even coneepts r and were therefore of necessity 



pi8 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

nameless Quite apart from the suppression of definitely heretical words, 
reduction of vocabulary was regarded as an end m itself, and no word that 
could be dispensed with was allowed to survive Newspeak was designed not to 
extend but to dimmish the range of thought, and this purpose was indirectly 
assisted by cutting the choice of words down to a minimum 

Newspeak was founded on the English language as we now know it, though 
many Newspeak sentences, even when not containing newly created words, 
would be barely intelligible to an Enghsh-speaker of our own day Newspeak 
words were divided into three distinct classes, known as the A vocabulary, the 
B vocabulary (also called compound words), and the C vocabulary It will be 
simpler to discuss each class separately, but the grammatical peculiarities of 
the language can be dealt with m the section devoted to the A vocabulary, since 
the same rules held good for all three categories 

The A vocabulary The A vocabulary consisted of the words needed for the 
business of everyday life-for such things as eating, drinking, working, putting 
on one’s clothes, going up and down stairs, riding m vehicles, gardening, 
cooking, and the like It was composed almost entirely of words that we already 
possess-words like hit , run , dog, tree, sugar , house, field- but m comparison 
with the present-day English vocabulary their number was extremely small, 
while their meanings were far more rigidly defined All ambiguities and shades 
of meaning had been purged out of them So far as it could be achieved, a 
Newspeak word of this class was simply a staccato sound expressing one clearly 
understood concept It would have been quite impossible to use the A 
vocabulary for literary purposes or for political or philosophical discussion It 
was intended only to express simple, purposive thoughts, usually involving 
concrete objects or physical actions 

The grammar of Newspeak had two outstanding peculiarities The first of 
these was an almost complete interchangeability between different parts of 
speech Any word in the language (in principle this applied even to very 
abstract words such as if or when) could be used either as verb, noun, adjective, 
or adverb Between the verb and the noun form, when they were of the same 
root, there was never any variation, this rule of itself involving the destruction 
of many archaic forms The word thought, for example? did not exist in 
Newspeak Its place was taken by think, which did duty for both noun and 
verb No etymological principle was followed here in some cases it was the 
original noun that was chosen for retention, in other cases the verb Even 
where a noun and verb of kindred meaning were not etymologically connected, 
one or other of them was frequently suppressed There was, for example, no 
such word as cut, its meaning being sufficiently covered by the noun- verb 
knife Adjectives were formed by adding the suffix -ful to the noun-verb, and 
adverbs, by adding -wise Thus for example, speedful meant ‘rapid’ and 
speejmse meant ‘quickly’ Certain of our present-day adjectives, such as good, 
strong,, big, black, soft , were retained, but their total number was very small 
There Wa& little need for them, since almost any adjectival meaning could be 
aiiivedatby adding - ful to a noun-verb None of the now-existmg adverbs was 



Nineteen Eighty-Four p jp 

retained, except for a very few already ending m -wise the -wise termination 
was invariable The word well, for example, was replaced by goodwise 

In addition, any word— this again applied in principle to every word m the 
language-could be negatived by adding the affix un-, or could be strengthened 
by the affix plus-, or, for still greater emphasis, doubleplus- Thus, for example, 
uncold meant warm , white pluscold and doublepluscold meant, respectively, 
‘very cold’ and ‘superlatively cold’ It was also possible, as m present-day 
English, to modify the meaning of almost any word by prepositional affixes 
such as ante-, post-, up-, down-, etc By such methods it was found possible to 
bring about an enormous diminution of vocabulary Given, for instance, the 
word good, there was no need for such a word as bad , since the required 
meaning was equally well-mdeed, better-expressed by ungood All that was 
necessary, m any case where two words formed a natural pair of opposites, was 
to decide which of them to suppress Dark , for example, could be replaced by 
unlight, or light by undark, according to preference 

The second distinguishing mark of Newspeak grammar was its regularity 
Subject to a few exceptions which are mentioned below all inflexions followed 
the same rules Thus, in all verbs the preterite and the past participle were the 
same and ended in -ed The preterite of steal was stealed, the preterite of think 
was thmked, and so on throughout the language, all such forms as swam, gave, 
brought, spoke, taken, etc , being abolished All plurals were made by adding 
or -es as the case might be The plurals of man , ox, life, were mans, oxes, lifes 
Comparison of adjectives was invariably made by adding - er , -est (good,gooder, 
goodest ), irregular forms and the more , most formation being suppressed 

The only classes of words that were still allowed to inflect irregularly were 
the pronouns, the relatives, the demonstrative adjectives, and the auxiliary 
verbs All of these followed their ancient usage, except that whom had been 
scrapped as unnecessary, and the shall, should tenses had been dropped, all 
their uses being covered by will and would There were also certain 
irregularities m word-formation arising out of the need for rapid and easy 
speech A word which was difficult to utter, or was liable to be incorrectly 
heard, was held to be ipso facto a bad word occasionally, therefore, for the sake 
of euphony, extra letters were inserted into a word or an archaic formation was 
retained But this need made itself felt chiefly in connexion with the B 
vocabulary Why so great an importance was attached to ease of pronunciation 
will be made clear later in this essay 

The B vocabulary The B vocabulary consisted of words which had been 
deliberately constructed for political purposes words, that is to say, which not 
only had m every case a political implication, but were intended to impose a 
desirable mental attitude upon the person using them Without a full 
understanding of the principles of Ingsoc it was difficult to use these words 
correctly In some cases they could be translated into Oldspeak, or even mto 
words taken from the A vocabulary, but this usually demanded a long 
paraphrase and always involved the loss of certain overtones The B words 
were a sort of verbal shorthands often paoking whole ranges of ideas mto a few 



p20 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

syllables, and at the same time more accurate and forcible than ordinary 
language 

The B words were m all cases compound words * They consisted of two or 
more words, or portions of words, welded together in an easily pronounceable 
form The resulting amalgam was always a noun- verb, and inflected according 
to the ordinary rules To take a single example the word goodthmk , meaning, 
very roughly, ‘orthodoxy’, or, if one chose to regard it as a verb, ‘to think in an 
orthodox manner’ This inflected as follows noun-verb, goodthmk , past tense 
and past participle, goodthmked, present participle, goodthinking , adjective, 
goodthinkful , adverb, goodthinkwise , verbal noun, goodthmker 

The B words were not constructed on any etymological plan The words of 
which they were made up could be any parts of speech, and could be placed m 
any order and mutilated in any way which made them easy to pronounce while 
indicating their derivation In the word cnmethink (thoughtcnme), for 
instance, the think came second, whereas m thmkpol (Thought Police) it came 
first, and m the latter word police had lost its second syllable Because of the 
greater difficulty m securing euphony, irregular formations were commoner m 
the B vocabulary than in the A vocabulary For example, the adjective forms of 
Mimtrue , Minipax , and Mimluv were, respectively. Minitruthful , Minipeaceful 
and Mimlovely , simply because -trueful 3 paxful , and -loveful were slightly 
awkward to pronounce In principle, however, all B words could inflect, and all 
inflected in exactly the same way 

Some of the B words had highly subtilized meamngs, barely intelligible to 
anyone who had not mastered the language as a whole Consider, for example, 
such a typical sentence from a Times leading article as Oldthmkers unbelly feel 
Ingsoc The shortest rendering that one could make of this in Oldspeak would 
be ‘Those whose ideas were formed before the Revolution cannot have a full 
emotional understanding of the principles of English Socialism ’ But this is 
not adequate translation To begin with, m order to grasp the full meaning of 
the Newspeak sentence quoted above, one would have to have a clear idea of 
what is meant by Ingsoc And in addition, only a person thoroughly grounded 
in Ingsoc could appreciate the full force of the word bellyfeel 3 which implied a 
blind, enthusiastic acceptance difficult to imagine today; or of the word 
oldihvnk , which was inextricably mixed up with the idea of wickedness and 
decadence But the special function of certain Newspeak words, of which 
oldtJnnk was one, was not so much to express meanings as to destroy them 
These words, necessarily few in number, had had their meamngs extended 
until they contained within themselves whole batteries of words which, as they 
were sufficiently covered by a single comprehensive term, could now be 
scrapped and forgotten The greatest difficulty facing the compilers of the 
Newspeak Dictionary was not to invent new words, but, having invented 
them, to make sure what they meant to make sure, that is to say, what ranges of 
words they cancelled by their existence 


*Cothpound words, such as speakvmte, were of course to be found in the A vocabulary, but 
itese were merely convenient abbreviations and had no special ideological colohr 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 921 

As we have already seen in the case of the word free, words which had once 
borne a heretical meaning were sometimes retained for the sake of 
convenience, but only with the undesirable meanings purged out of them 
Countless other words such as honour , justice , morality , internationalism , 
democracy , science , and religion had simply ceased to exist A few blanket words 
covered them, and, in covering them, abolished them All words grouping 
themselves round the concepts of liberty and equality, for instance, were 
contained in the single word cnmethmk 3 while all words grouping themselves 
round the concepts of objectivity and rationalism were contained in the single 
word oldthmk Greater precision would have been dangerous What was 
required in a Party member was an outlook similar to that of the ancient 
Hebrew who knew, without knowing much else, that all nations other th a n his 
own worshipped ‘false gods’. He did not need to know that these gods were 
called Baal, Osins, Moloch, Ashtaroth, and the like probably the less he knew 
about them the better for his orthodoxy He knew Jehovah and the 
commandments of Jehovah he knew, therefore, that all gods with other names 
or other attributes were false gods In somewhat the same way, the Party 
member knew what constituted right conduct, and m exceedingly vague, 
generalized terms he knew what kinds of departure from it were possible His 
sexual life, for example, was entirely regulated by the two Newspeak words 
sexcnme (sexual immorality) and goodsex (chastity) Sexcnme covered all 
sexual misdeeds whatever It covered fornication, adultery, homosexuality, 
and other perversions, and, m addition, normal intercourse practised for its 
own sake There was no need to enumerate them separately, since they were all 
equally culpable, and, m principle, all punishable by death In the C 
vocabulary, which consisted of scientific and technical words, it might be 
necessary to give specialized names to certain sexual aberrations, but the 
ordinary citizen had no need of them He knew what was meant by 
goodsex-xhsX. is to say, normal intercourse between man and wife, for the sole 
purpose of begetting children, and without physical pleasure on the part of the 
woman all else was sexcnme In Newspeak it was seldom possible to follow a 
heretical thought further than the perception that it was heretical beyond that 
point the necessary words were non-existent 

No word in the B vocabulary was ideologically neutral A great many were 
euphemisms. Such words, for instance, as joycamp (forced-labour camp) or 
minipax (Ministry of Peace, i e. Ministry of War) meant almost the exact 
opposite of what they appeared to mean Some words, on the other hand, 
displayed a frank and contemptuous understanding of the real nature of 
Oceanic society An example was prolefeed , meaning the rubbishy 
entertainment and spurious news which the Party handed out to the masses 
Other words, again, were ambivalent, having the connotation ‘good’ when 
applied to the Party and ‘bad’ when applied to its enemies But in addition 
there were great n umb ers of words which at first sight appeared to be mere 
abbreviations and which derived their ideological colour not from their 
meamng, but from their structure * ' ’ 

So far as* it could be contrived, everything that had or might have political 



$22 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

significance of any kind was fitted into the B vocabulary The name of every 
organization, or body of people, or doctrine, or country, or institution, or 
public building, was invariably cut down into the familiar shape, that is, a 
single easily pronounced word with the smallest number of syllables that 
would preserve the original derivation In the Ministry of Truth, for example, 
the Records Department, in which Winston Smith worked, was called Recdep, 
the Fiction Department was called Ficdep, the Tele-programmes Department 
was called Teledep, and so on This was not done solely with the object of 
saving time Even in the early decades of the twentieth century, telescoped 
words and phrases had been one of the characteristic features of political 
language, and it had been noticed that the tendency to use abbreviations of this 
kind was most marked m totalitarian countries and totalitarian organizations 
Examples were such words as Nazi, Gestapo, Comintern, Inprecorr, Agitprop 
In the beginning the practice had been adopted as it were instinctively, but in 
Newspeak it was used with a conscious purpose It was perceived that in thus 
abbreviating a name one narrowed and subtly altered its meaning, by cutting 
out most of the associations that would otherwise cling to it The words 
Communist International, for instance, call up a composite picture of universal 
human brotherhood, red flags, barricades, Karl Marx, and the Paris 
Commune The word Comintern, on the other hand, suggests merely a tightly 
knit organization and a well-defined body of doctrine It refers to something 
almost as easily recognized, and as limited m purpose, as a chair or a table 
Comintern is a word that can be uttered almost without taking thought, 
whereas Communist International is a phrase over which one is obliged to linger 
at least momentarily In the same way, the associations called up by a word like 
Mimtrue are fewer and more controllable than those called up by Ministry of 
Truth This accounted not only for the habit of abbreviating whenever 
possible, but also for the almost exaggerated care that was taken to make every 
word easily pronounceable 

In Newspeak, euphony outweighed every consideration other than 
exactitude of meaning Regularity of grammar was always sacrificed to it when 
it seemed necessary And rightly so, since what was required, above all for 
political purposes, was short clipped words of unmistakable meaning which 
could be uttered rapidly and which roused the mimmum of echoes m the 
speaker’s mind The words of the B vocabulary even gained in force from the 
fact that nearly all of them were very much alike Almost ^variably these 
words -’goodthmk, Mimpax, prolefeed, sexcnme, joycamp, lngsoc, belly feel, 
thinkpol, and countless others- were words of two or three syllables, with the 
stress distributed equally between the first syllable and the last The use of 
them encouraged a gabbling style of speech, at once staccato and monotonous 
And this was exactly what was aimed at The intention was to make speech, 
and especially speech on any subject not ideologically neutral, as nearly as 
possible Independent Of consciousness For the purposes of everday life it was 
no doubt necessary, or sometimes necessary, to reflect before speaking, but a 
Party member called upon to make a political or ethical judgment should be 
abte#o*spray forth the correct opinions as automatically as a machine-gun 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 923 

spraying forth bullets His training fitted him to do this, the language gave him 
an almost foolproof instrument, and the texture of the words, with their harsh 
sound and a certain wilful ugliness which was m accord with the spirit of 
Ingsoc, assisted the process still further 

So did the fact of having very few words to choose from Relative to our own, 
the Newspeak vocabulary was tiny, and new ways of reducing it were 
constantly being devised Newspeak, mdeed, differed from most all other 
languages m that its vocabulary grew smaller instead of larger every year Each 
reduction was a gam, since the smaller the area of choice, the smaller the 
temptation to take thought. Ultimately it was hoped to make articulate speech 
issue from the larynx without involving the higher brain centres at all This 
aim was frankly admitted m the Newspeak word duckspeak, meaning ‘to quack 
like a duck’ Like various other words m the B vocabulary, duckspeak was 
ambivalent in meaning Provided that the opinions which were quacked out 
were orthodox ones, it implied nothing but praise, and when The Times 
referred to one of the orators of the Party as a doubleplusgaod duckspeaker it was 
paying a warm and valued compliment 

The C vocabulary The C vocabulary was supplementary to the others and 
consisted entirely of scientific and technical terms These resembled the 
scientific terms m use today, and were constructed from the same roots, but 
the usual care was taken to define them rigidly and strip them of undesirable 
meanings They followed the same grammatical rules as the words m the other 
two vocabularies Very few of the C words had any currency either m everyday 
speech or m political speech Any scientific worker or technician could find all 
the words he needed m the list devoted to his words occurring m the other lists 
Only a very few words were common to all lists, and there was no vocabulary 
expressing the function of Science as a habit of mind, or a method of thought, 
irrespective of its particular branches There was, mdeed, no word for 
‘Science’, any meaning that it could possibly bear being already sufficiently 
covered by the word Ingsoc 

From the foregoing account it will be seen that in Newspeak the expression 
of unorthodox opinions, above a very low level, was well-nigh impossible It 
was of course possible to utter heresies of a very crude kind, a species of 
blasphemy It would have been possible, for example, to say Big Brother is 
ungood But this statement, which to an orthodox ear merely conveyed a self- 
evident absurdity, could not have been sustained by reasoned argument, 
because the necessary words were not available Ideas inimical to Ingsoc could 
only be entertained in a vague wordless form, and could only be named m very 
broad terms which lumped together and condemned whole groups of heresies 
without defining them in doing so One could, in fact, only use Newspeak for 
unorthodox purposes by legitimately translating some of the words back into 
Oldspeak. For example,^!// mans are equal was a possible Newspeak sentence, 
but only in the same sense mv^dh Allmenate redhaired is a possible Oldspeak 
sentence ft did not contsin a gramOTaticalf-orror, but unexpressed a palpable 



9 24 Nineteen Eighty-Four 

untruth-i e that all men are of equal size, weight, or strength The concept of 
political equality no longer existed, and this secondary meaning had 
accordingly been purged out of the word equal In 1984, when Oidspeak was 
still the normal means of communication, the danger theoretically existed that 
m using Newspeak words one might remember their original meanings In 
practice it was not difficult for any person well grounded m doublethink to 
avoid doing this, but within a couple of generations even the possibility of such 
a lapse would have vanished A person growing up with Newspeak as his sole 
language would no more know that equal had once had the secondary meaning 
of ‘politically equal’, or that free had once meant ‘intellectually free’, than for 
instance, a person who had never heard of chess would be aware of the 
secondary meamngs attaching to queen and rook There would be many crimes 
and errors which it would be beyond his power to commit, simply because they 
were nameless and therefore unimaginable And it was to be foreseen that with 
the passage of time the distinguishing characteristics of Newspeak would 
become more and more pronounced-its words growing fewer and fewer, their 
meanings more and more rigid, and the chance of putting them to improper 
uses always diminishing 

When Oidspeak had been once and for all superseded, the last link with the 
past would have been severed History had already been rewritten, but 
fragments of the literature of the past survived here and there, imperfectly 
censored, and so long as one retained one’s knowledge of Oidspeak it was 
possible to read them In the future such fragments, even if they chanced to 
survive, would be unintelligible and untranslatable. It was impossible to 
translate any passage of Oidspeak into Newspeak unless it either referred to 
some technical process or some very simple everyday action, or was already 
orthodox (goodthinkful would be the Newspeak expression) m tendency In 
practice this meant that no book written before approximately i960 could be 
translated as a whole Pre-revolutionary literature could only be subjected to 
ideological translation-that is, alteration in sense as well as language Take for 
example the well-known passage from the Declaration of Inpendence 


We hold, these truths to be self-evident , that all men are created equal, that they tire endowed by their 
creator with certain inalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness 
That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among men, deriving their powers from the 
consent of the governed That whenever any form of Government becomes destructive of those ends, it is 
the nght of the People to alter or abolish it and to institute new Government 

It would have been quite impossible to render this into Newspeak while 
keeping to the sense of the original The nearest one could come to doing so 
would be to swallow the whole passage up in the single word cnmethink A full 
translation could only be an ideological translation, whereby Jefferson’s words 
would bo changed into a panegyric on absolute government 
A good deal of the literature of the past was, indeed, already being 
transformed, m this way Considerations of prestige made it desirable to 
prsjservo the . memory of certain historical figures, while at the same time 
hihgjhgiihiir achieve ments i nto line with the philosophy of Ingsoc. Various 



Nineteen Eighty-Four 92s 

writers, such as Shakespeare, Milton, Swift, Byron, Dickens, and some others 
were therefore in process of translation when the task had been completed, 
their original writings, with all else that survived of the literature of the past, 
would be destroyed These translations were a slow and difficult business, and 
it was not expected that they would be finished before the first or second 
decade of the twenty-first century There were also large quantities of merely 
utilitarian literature-indispensable technical manuals, and the hke-that had 
to be treated m the same way It was chiefly in order to allow time for the 
preliminary work of translation that the final adoption of Newspeak had been 
fixed for so late a date as 2050 